[Music]
Hey,
hey,
hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Heat.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Laughter]
[Music]
Heat.
to order the study session of Tuesday,
September 9th, 2025. Five. Um, items 1
through five and 7 are executive
sessions.
Miss Clerk,
executive session one is noticed as an
annual review and evaluation of the
performance of the city manager and is
being held pursuant to ARS section
38-431.03A1
and A3. Item three is notice as
executive session discussion regarding
workers compensation claims for
occupational cancer and the scope of ARS
section 23-901.09
relating to cancers that are presumed to
be an occupational cancer for
firefighters and fire investigators and
is being held pursuant to ARS section
38-431.03
A3 and A4. Item five is notice as
executive session Goodman versus City of
Tucson Pum County Superior Court number
C2094826
and application of the city's group
dwelling land use code regulations to
properties within the scope of this
litigation and is being held pursuant to
ARS section 38-431 A 03 A3 and A4 and
item seven is notice as executive
session discussion and consideration of
applicants for appointment to the
position of city attorney and is being
held pursuant to ARS section 38-431.03
A1 and A3. So for the record, Miss
Clerk, what I'd like to do is consider
executive session item three first,
deliberate, and then come out and um
give direction to the city attorney on
this and then go back to executive
session if that's okay.
That's fine.
All righty. May I have a motion to go
into executive session, please?
There's a motion and a second. Any
further discussion on this item? Hearing
none. All those in favor, please signify
by saying I.
I.
I. Any against? Motion carries. We'll
see you out in a bit.
[Music]
Hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Heat. Hey, Heat.
Heat.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Laughter]
[Music]
There is a motion and a second. All
those in favor signify by saying I.
I.
I. Any against? Motion carries. Item
four.
Honorable mayor, members of the council,
I would ask for a motion that the mayor
and council authorize and direct the
city manager and city attorney to treat
all adino carcinomomas as presumptive
cancers under ARS section 23-91.01
which relates to peace officers and
23-91.09
09 which relates to firefighters and
fire investigators consistent with the
January 23rd, 2025 industrial
commission's substantive policy
statement until a controlling court
opinion decides this issue regarding
city employees pending adino carcinoma
claims. The mayor and council authorized
and direct the city attorney to proceed
as discussed in executive session,
including again treating all adino
carcinomomas as presumptive cancers
under those statutes.
May I have a motion, please?
So moved. Second.
There's a motion in a second. Any
further discussion?
Uh, Councilman Lee,
I just want to say, mayor, thank you for
bringing this forward. Thank you to the
team for making us aware of this gap.
Um, cancer is the number one reason that
we lose firefighters across this
country. So, I think the more that we
can do to take care of all of you who
are taking care of our community, it's
the truly the least we can do. So, thank
you, mayor, for making sure we are able
to make this change today.
Thank you, Councilwoman. Any others?
Hearing none. All those in favor of the
motion, please signify by saying I.
I.
Any against? Motion carries. Thank you
so much.
I was just going to go back into
executive session, but we need a motion
to go back to executive session. And
thank you all so much.
Thank you for coming.
Uh there's a motion and a second. All
those in favor signify by saying I. I.
I. Any against? Motion carries.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey,
[Music]
hey,
hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
couple.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Heat. Hey, Heat.
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Everything.
[Music]
Goodbye.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey,
[Music]
hey.
Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Come on.
Heat. Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Happy.
[Music]
Hey
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
down feel down.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Laughter]
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Oh
yeah.
[Music]
Hey.
Wow. Oh. Heat.
[Music]
Heat.
feel
it. Feel
[Music]
Back.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Heat
[Music]
up
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Heat.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Laughter]
[Music]
Hey,
Hey, hey, hey.
I mean,
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Oh,
[Music]
hey.
I feel
[Music]
it.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey,
hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey, Heat.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
everything.
[Music]
Hey
Hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey.
I'm a
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Laughter]
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey. Hey, hey, hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
tra.
Heat.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey,
hey.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat.
Heat. Heat. N.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey,
hey, hey, hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
I'm
happy.
[Music]
[Laughter]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Heat. Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Oh,
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
Everything.
[Music]
Hey.
Heat. Hey, Heat.
[Music]
down.
Hey
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
Hey,
[Music]
hey,
hey. Hey
[Music]
hey.
Heat.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
feel.
Hey Heat.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Hey, Heat.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
[Laughter]
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
I'm
Heat. Hey, Heat.
[Music]
Heat. Hey, heat. Hey, heat.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Do it.
Hey,
hey, hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
me.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
D.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Everything
feel
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
down.
Hey
[Music]
Hey.
Heat
[Music]
Heat. Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Laughter]
Heat
up
[Music]
here.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
everything. Hey
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Hey, Heat.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey. Hey.
Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
travel.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Black.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
[Laughter]
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Do you me
down?
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
me.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Everything.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.
Hey, hey,
hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey,
hey,
[Music]
hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey.
Heat. Hey. Hey. Hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
feel.
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
down.
[Music]
Hey
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
and a second. Any further discussion?
All those in favor signify by saying I.
I.
Any against? Motion carries. Uh we move
on to item two.
Honorable mayor, an appropriate motion
would be for the mayor and council to
move that the mayor and council find
that the city manager has met or
exceeded expectations and that we will
continue to move forward under the terms
of the existing employment agreement.
So moved, your honor.
Seconded.
There's a motion in a second. Any
further discussion on this? I do. I just
want to add Tim uh thank you so much for
your service to our community. I look
forward to many years. Um,
uh, lots of good work together and and I
appreciate,
um, being able to, you know, uh, spend
time with you. We spent a lot of time
together. Um, I'm I'm very appreciative
of your wit and your intelligence,
and I know that we're in good hands with
you. So, thank you. Thank you so much,
Tim, for your service.
Any others? Hearing none. All those in
favor of the motion, please signify by
saying I.
I I.
Any against? Motion carries.
I have one more. Mayor
motion.
Yes. So, I've, you know, always believed
in a process and co-governance and
values that are motivated me to run for
the city council in the first place. My
goal since being on the council um has
been to have having processes and
procedures to ensure that our community
that we're being transparent to our
community, being accountable um and
building that trust with the people that
we serve. I think part of our
conversation that, you know, that we
were having an in executive was to also
kind of formalize a review process
throughout all of our our executive, you
know, charter um positions that is the
city manager, the city attorney, and the
city clerk. Um, so with that, I also
wanted to move that we schedule a study
session item for a November meeting to
discuss and review best practice
examples of processes and tools for
consistent evaluation and review of the
city manager, the city attorney, and the
city clerk.
Second.
There is a motion, a second. Any further
discussion on this hearing? None. All
those in favor, please signify by saying
I.
Any against? Motion carries. Thank you
so much. All righty. So, we move on to
item six.
Thank you, mayor. This is relating to
the uh litigation uh Goodman versus the
city of Tucson. I'm asking for a motion
that the mayor and council authorize and
direct the city attorney and city
manager to proceed as discussed in
executive session and to settle this
litigation by taking the following two
actions. One, providing the plainif with
a binding waiver of enforcement of the
city's group dwelling ordinance as to
the Goodman properties that are the
subject of the filed lawsuit. And two,
paying pliff $2 million in exchange for
a full release of all claims and
dismissal of the lawsuit.
So moved.
There is a motion in a second. Any
further discussion on this item?
Hearing none. All those in favor, please
signify by saying I.
I.
I. Any against? Motion carries.
Item eight.
Mayor, I would ask for a motion on this
item that the mayor and council
authorize and direct the city manager,
HR director, and our recruiter to
proceed as discussed in executive
session and to move forward and to
schedule interviews with the applicants
as discussed. The names and resumes of
the applicants will be released once
those interviews are scheduled.
There is a motion.
Second.
There's a motion and a second. Any
further discussion on this item
hearing? None. All those in favor,
please signify by saying I.
I. Any against? Motion carries. Thank
you so much. We are done with the
executive session direction. We are
moving on to item nine. Uh, Vice Mayor
Santa Cruz and Council Member Bettis
requested this item to allow the mayor
and council to provide direction
regarding a resolution proposed by the
human relations commission. The
resolution is to reaffirm the city's
commitment to address groundwater
contamination near the Tucson
International Airport. Um, vice mayor,
uh, you brought this to to the table, so
I'm just going to, um, hand over the mic
to you.
All right. Thank you. So, thank you,
mayor, and to my colleagues for this um
time. I wanted to begin by uplifting the
leadership of Alicia Vasquez, who's a
good friend, but also a fifth generation
tuon and the co-director of the
Mexican-American Heritage and History
Museum, for her tireless advocacy around
the legacy of TCE contamination on
Tucson Southside. Um earlier this year,
Alicia um reached out to our office to
bring this proposed resolution forward.
Since then, my office has worked closely
with the members of the human relations
commission to move this forward with the
support it deserves. So, thank you to my
colleague um council member Pettis for
um uh being in support of this. Um the
the letter grounded in years of
community engagement and lived
experience makes clear tce
contamination. It's not just a
historical event. It's a continuing
public health environmental justice
issue. I had the opportunity last week
to be part of a a panel with u Mr.
Harammo um talking about um the our our
experience with TCE growing up on the
southside and how important it is that
um we continue to tell this story um to
to other students at the university or
just community members um that continue
to live with this trauma, fearing their
tap water, carrying grief for lost loved
ones and fighting back against new
threats um as most recently with Project
Lou. At the same time, younger
generations often don't know this
history because it hasn't been taught,
shared, or acknowledged at the scale it
should be. That silence creates risk.
And as I'm, you know, uh, thinking about
this right now, um, I continue to only
drink filtered water because of this
trauma from being young. I just don't,
you know, trust tap water. And as much
as this body, you know, talks to people
about our water being safe, I think
that's a a real um yeah, just trauma
that that we carry um in in our homes.
Um we've also heard clearly about gaps
in healthcare access. The small amount
of funding currently available, around
$250,000 annually, is simply not meeting
the needs. Residents are being asked to
educate their doctors, wait months for
appointments, and pay for care they
can't afford. Um, so we know that our
our policy needs to match the reality on
the ground and that means supporting
stronger community education and
historical preservation around TCE.
Expanding access to trauma infor
informed culturally competent healthc
care for impacted residents and ensuring
that the burden of cleanup care and
accountability falls on the polluters
and not the people. Um, so I want to
thank again Alicia, the Human Relations
Commission, um, to our folks on the
ground who have been um, doing this work
for over two decades. um to every
Southside resident who continues to tell
the truth and demand action. And I know
it just doesn't this is a not only a
symbolic but just a commitment that we
continue to make um and acknowledging
this history and the impact it's had on
our communities and that we know that
ongoing as a public health issue that we
also need the county um to be a part of
this. Um, so with that, I'll hand it
over um to Council Member Perez and then
invite Daniel Sullivan and Roberto Harmo
to the podium.
I have no further comments. I would
invite them.
Um, Mr. Harmo, if you'd like to come up
um to
the micro harmo.
Oh, to the to mic.
Yes, Roberto Harmo. Thank you for having
me. Uh, I just noticed my name was
misspelled. It's J A R A M I L L O. Uh,
thank you for having me here, Mayor
Council. Uh, first of all, I'd like to
say thank you for the no big no on
project blue. So, thank you so much.
Yes, we've dealt with this is nothing
new to the southsiders been has been
going on for decades
uh too far too long and hopefully
it'll eventually stop one of these days.
I don't know what probably not in my
lifetime and nor some of our folks here.
But uh the health issue has been the
issue for many many many years. not only
physically but mentally that thought
that hey we we see our our neighbors,
our family members, our classmates and
the list goes on passing away some at a
very young age some of it doesn't catch
up to until later. You know back in the
heyday we had the discussion way before
and from the research that we've done it
affects the youth that drank the water
way back when and affects the elderly.
For a lot of us, we're now both. We were
the youth and now we're the elders and
it's catching up to us. It's taken some
time, but it's a lot of us have come
down with certain illnesses. I know
family members uh like I said,
classmates, but part of the resolution
or the recommend recommendation is uh
four and five to I believe it says to
talk about this during UKAB meetings if
I'm not mistaken. Well, I'm hoping that
it does get incorporated into the bylaws
of the UKAB because when people have
brought the issue health issues to the
committee, a lot of times they're not
allowed to speak about health issues
because predominantly the UK uh
committee was was built for uh
overlooking the cleanup of the
environmental issues that we had in in
our uh community. So, it would be
greatly appreciated if folks in our
community
would be and will be allowed to speak
about health issues that have affected
our community. It's long overdue, guys.
Folks, uh, a lot of times people have
tried to speak up on it, but because of
I guess the the bylaws, they don't allow
you to talk about about the health
issues. So, it's greatly appreciated
that it is incorporated into UKAP. and I
don't know how it's going to be done,
when it's going to be done, but I hope
it's done soon. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Harmo. Um, I wanted to um
invite the other speaker up to make
sure.
Yeah. No, both of you are I think the
other speaker is
Daniel Sullivan. Daniel.
Yeah. Uh, hello. I'm Daniel Sullivan.
I'm an associate professor of psychology
and a community researcher at the
University of Arizona. Uh and just in
the interest of time, I just have
prepared a statement which I'll I'll
read. I thank you very much for the time
today. Uh so in 2023, my students and I
conducted a door-to-door survey of
nearly 400 Tucson residents. We obtained
random and representative samples of
people living in the southside TIAA EPA
super fund site area as well as in a
comparable area of Tucson matched for
demographic risk factors. And using
well- validated measures, we found
people residing in Southside Tucson who
had lived there since the time before
the super fun site was declared uh as
well as their children uh had the
highest levels of post-traumatic stress
related to contamination and the highest
rates of depression compared to any
other group in our study. And in fact,
one in three people who had been
historically exposed to contamination in
our sample still suffer from what might
be clinically relevant levels of
post-traumatic stress about this issue.
Uh furthermore, people in this group
self-reported the highest levels of
cancer, autoimmune disease, and birth
defects in our sample.
Having worked with people such as uh Mr.
Hermo on the southside for 10 years now.
What I frequently hear from those active
on the issue is that the city has done a
good job over uh the last few decades
addressing the groundwater contamination
itself. We know this is not easy or
cheap work to do. We're grateful for the
amount of testing and remediation effort
that goes into providing safe water in
Tucson, but I've also heard from people
on the south side their feeling that
while the water is treated, the people
often go untreated. Uh those who bore
the brunt of the impacts of this
historic contamination have by and large
been left on their own to cope with the
many physical and mental health
difficulties in their community. In this
largely lower income part of Tucson,
even the fortunate people who have
health insurance struggle to get
appointments at affordable clinics and
to cover co-pays for essential
treatments. At the people's hearing on
environmental justice, which took place
in Tucson last week, Mayor Romero and US
Representative nominee Grihalva spoke
passionately about the need to protect
our water and not repeat the mistakes of
Tucson's past. The resolution that has
been put forward by the Human Relations
Commission based on community input
reaffirms this goal and commends the
city and partner organizations for all
they've done to clean our water. But the
resolution also states this alone is not
enough. As the people of Southside
Tucson know, you can't treat the
environment without treating the people
and vice versa. I hope mayor and council
will affirm their commitment and use
their voices to protect not only the
contaminated water of Tucson, but the
people whose lives have been changed by
it. I thank the W one and W five council
members for bringing the resolution
forward. Thank you very much for your
time, work, and consideration. Uh, and I
think we're both happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Sullivan. I I I I just
wanted to thank Vice Mayor Santa Cruz
and Council Member Perez. Um Vice Mayor,
you and your staff have done a lot of
leg work to make sure that we bring this
resolution to the table. And so I just
want to uh thank you uh and your staff
for for the work.
So want to recognize the Tucson Human
Relations Commission uh ha for having
this conversation. Right. um human
relations commission has a history of
bringing items to the table um for the
board for the mayor and council to
consider. Uh it it really is about human
rights
and um equity and um environmental
justice. Um, and so it's important that
they had this conversation and that
we're having this conversation based on
the leg work and the research and the uh
work that the human relations commission
and others like Mr. Sullivan, Mr. Haramu
and all others that participate
uh in this discussion. Um,
I also want to start by acknowledging
the pain and trauma
uh that many Southside residents have
and continue to feel about water
contamination
tied to the Tucson International Airport
area. Um, this is a legacy issue that
goes back decades and generations and it
is absolutely right that we continue to
confront it, talk about it.
um and really act on it with urgency and
honesty. Uh residents in the southside
often uh the biggest percentages Latino
low-income families bore the brunt of
the exposure and health consequences of
tce
um for many cancer clusters and other
illnesses were not abstract statistics.
They were personal losses
and to this day many um have lupus and
other uh health consequences and
illnesses because of tce.
Um
it is uh it is important that I be clear
on a couple of things. First uh Tucson
Water uh has been and continues to be a
leader in remediation.
um especially with the most current 14
dioxide and POS issues with TCE. I
cannot speak about how you know mayor
and council and Tucson Water reacted at
the time. Um,
but what I can say is that,
um, since the time I've been on the
council, um, mayor and council have been
very deliberate about acting
immediately,
uh, to remediate any, uh, concerns with
contaminants uh, and then ask question
later. Right? It happened with 14
dioxide. It has happened with PEPAS.
Mayor and council were very clear um and
Tucson Water acted immediately to
remediate
uh those contaminants in our water
supply. And now we can say that Tucson
Water and the city of Tucson delivers
safe drinking water because of the
efforts that we have um moved on. uh
it's um most recently we've learned uh
how to
um act in concerns about health with
with tonins. Second, I think the mo an
important uh thing that we have to uh
say is that while we fully support
increased access to health care for
residents impacted by contamination,
the city itself has a limited role in
providing medical services to our
community.
um that responsibility lies within both
county, state and federal partners and
we can advocate
um for access to medical services. Um
and that's what we need to do. That's
what we have been doing as a mayor and
council. Um I see this resolution uh not
as a final word on this conversation but
as one important step forward. Uh it
reaffirms our role as water stewards,
strengthens coordination with community
groups like and lays the groundwork for
future advocacy. There's still
absolutely much more work uh to do. We
have to be proactive because uh we don't
know what challenges may be looming
ahead of us. Uh it is our commitment for
Tucson to continue to lead with
integrity, transparency, and deep
respect for the communities most
affected. The city continues to work
with the EPA, ADQ, and UKAB to push for
accountability for corporate polluters.
the Department of Defense and the US Air
Force. Uh when these contaminants were
discovered, Tucson faced a hard choice.
And I'm talking most recently one for
Dioxine and PAS. Um
wait for lawsuits and federal cleanup
processes to play play out or act
immediately to protect the people of
Tucson. Uh, we chose to act. As I often
say, we had to take action first and ask
questions later. That meant building
treatment plants quickly. The Tucson
Airport Remediation Project or TARP was
one of the first major steps designed to
treat groundwater contaminated with TCE
near the airport. Later the Randolph
Park um advanced oxidation facility
added treatment capacity and today we
are among the first utilities in the
country to address PAS contamination. Um
we saw high levels of PAS coming in
through our our um
uh water system and we acted on it
immediately. Uh we couldn't wait. I
remember clearly the conversations that
this mayor and council had. We would not
wait for the con uh polluters and those
responsible to pay. We had to figure it
out and do it ourselves because the
health of our residents came first. Um
and that decision to act quickly save
life lives and it reflects uh a core
principle of environmental justice which
is to protect frontline communities uh
and those who cannot wait for answers
from polluters.
What I would suggest is that uh Mr.
Sullivan and the human relations
commission as well as uh Mr. Harammo
take the same resolution to Pima County.
Puma County is the jurisdiction that is
responsible for public health.
Um they do have a public health board
that uh this item should be brought to
the board of supervisors
um are as easily accessible as mayor and
council are. I know that um the
representatives that represent the
southside uh would be absolutely willing
to work with you all. Um, and as a
public health um um a jurisdiction
responsible for public health, I would
highly recommend that Pima County
approve a similar resolution uh with
their commitment uh to public health
issues regarding TCE.
Um
so and that the language and the
resolution vice mayor have uh include
Puma County as the responsible
jurisdiction uh for public health issues
in the in in in um
in in in our community. That's what I
would suggest that we add that language.
Um, looking at the resolution, there are
certain areas that we can add um that we
urge the city and Puma County to
increase access to uh funding for
healthcare residents impacted by
contamination.
Uh, of course, the city of Tucson is
going after the polluters. Um, and we
are going to continue making sure that
UK, CAB and other stakeholders in our
community are part of that conversation.
With that, uh, Vice Mayor, do you have a
a a motion?
Um, city attorney, so is that something
you can add to the resolution?
uh Vice Mayor and Mayor Romero, yes, we
can make uh those modifications to uh
the resolution as we bring it back and
we anticipated that in the mayor and
council memorandum. So, thank you for
that direction.
Okay. Thank you. Um, so again, just, you
know, I want to make sure that we're
reaffirming our commitment to protecting
Tucson's water above and below ground,
that we keep moni monitoring our water
systems to meet or exceed EPA
guidelines, including standards rolled
back at the federal level, and that we
echo the community's call that water is
life, and we will continue to be good
stewards of it for future generations.
So, with that, I move that we approve
the proposed resolution with the
modifications recommended by the mayor.
Um, and that the city of Tucson formally
affirm our ongoing commitment to
addressing groundwater contamination
affecting Tucson Southside.
Seconded.
So, there is a motion and a second and I
do see some hands up. Uh, Council Member
Ole and then Council Member Do.
Thank you, Mayor, and thank you, Vice
Mayor, and uh, Council Member Pettis for
bringing this forward as well as the
Human Relations Commission. Um, and u I
just wanted to acknowledge uh two
mentors and friends of mine, Abe and
Cecilia Campio, who are very involved,
have been involved for decades. Abe has
passed away. Cecilia is still going
strong. Um, but I just wanted to
acknowledge their lifelong legacy of
advocacy and um um and am very very
pleased to support this action. Thank
you,
Council Member D.
Thank you, Mayor. Thank you, Vice Mayor,
Council Member Perez, the commission,
and the many activists on the south side
who for decades um have illuminated this
horrible problem. It is a horrible
problem. I'm very happy to be supporting
this initiative because we just have to.
Thank you,
uh Council Member Pis.
Yeah. So, I know majority of the human
relations commission isn't here, but um
for those that are watching online, I
really appreciate the time that you all
took. Um I know it's not always easy um
uh you know, being confined to our
quorum rules for our BCC's. Um but I
really appreciate all the time that you
all took um to really coales around this
effort. Um I think this is really what
participatory government is about. Um,
and you know, I'm very happy that we
were able to support this.
I have a a question. And I know that
that that when the city of Tucson and
Tucson Water settled
um with Department of Defense
um that the consent decree had um
uh a requirement for um for the DoD to
fund a clinic.
I don't know if you if you can recall
Tim or Mike or Chris Avery.
I don't recall.
I don't recall that being a component.
Uh good afternoon members of the mayor
and council. This is Chris Ser from the
city attorney's office. The consent
decree that we signed for uh
participation in TARP did not have the u
language in it about funding a clinic.
Okay. Um but our obligations under that
the consent decree when we talk about
the the consent decree that we entered
into it's primarily related to the
operations of the TARP program
and we are currently as we've discussed
in the midst of negotiating amendments
to that consent decree to add 14 dioxane
uh into the terms of the consent decree
but it does not have a provision for
medical care or clinical facilities in
it and as far as I know never did.
Okay. Uh, and then so I think it must
have been Pima County Public Health
Department that
there was a TCE clinic that was opened
on the southside. Am I remembering
wrong?
There was alo clinic.
Okay. Can you can you can you come to
the to the mic, Mr. Haramo?
Yes. The clinic there was uh Hold on.
There there was a clinic established by
the name of Al PBlo clinic
but
they were limited to the services they
could provide
from uh the documentation that we have.
So there, you know,
my question was why even have a clinic
if they didn't serve the purpose that
people the the serve the people they
were supposed to be serving.
I don't think that I think it was only
funded for about $250,000.
$250,000 could go how far? Not very far
back then or even now? Less now. So
there was one, but I think the services
that they provided
were minimal.
Mhm.
To say to say the least.
I I remember and I think Karen, you're
you're you're nodding you're nodding
your head. I remember hearing about a
TCE clinic at El Po. Um and I think it
was Puma County that uh that funded that
uh that work. And so I think even more
reason, vice mayor, to uh request that
the board of supervisors pass a similar
resolution and commit uh to their public
health work together with uh all of us
uh to make sure that um
um that any continued information is
shared by Puma County and of course that
there is hyperfocus on the concerns of
Southside residents. Uh, so
I I don't know if you would want to add
to your motion, vice mayor, that we um
that we mayor and council ask the board
of supervisors
um to
um pass a similar resolution and that we
have a conversation together uh so that
we can find uh appropriate solutions
into the future. Vice uh Councilman
Rulick, thank you. I I am wondering and
and it may may not be correct or or
appropriate timing or even possible, but
I'm wondering about as we're negotiating
on these issues as well to make sure
that we don't forget not only the cost
of treating water to get it back to
safety standards, but but the the
impacts to the communities and whether
in in uh negotiating our agreements with
Department of Defense or the airport or
whoever
the the uh wherever the pollution starts
from. And maybe that's a partnership
with the county as well to see whether
there's a way to get more resources
toward the health care needs and the and
and really the recovery
um in all ways of of people impacted. So
that that's uh doesn't I don't think
need to be part of the motion since the
counties alluded to in the resolution,
but I think that would be a really
fruitful partnership. Mayor, if I may,
it says in July of 19 19 1993,
the Pima County Board of Supervisors
allocated $250,000 to a public clinic to
provide primary care treatment to Tucson
residents who have lived have he have
health conditions that could possibly be
linked to TC contamination. So, it was
in 93. Okay. So, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Haramo.
And if I may, a little more information.
So, um, I've done some research on this
and Sonora Taylor is a a historian and a
a scholar who has done some research on
the clinic. And according to her work,
um, uh, in 2001, the clinic's board
accepted settlement funds from a class
action lawsuit uh, intended to provide
medical monitoring funds. Uh as part of
the settlement, the court ordered the
creation of a joint operation actually
with the UOVA uh where I work uh the
college of public health to conduct
screenings for TCE related illnesses. Uh
but according to Dr. Taylor's work, the
program lasted from 2001 through 2004.
Uh in 2005, the university stepped away
from the program with the court's
approval. Uh leaving El PBLO to oversee
it until 2007. Uh but at that time a
final report was issued. Uh so based on
that information it sounds like at
different points maybe the Pima County
and the University of Arizona were
involved but it it doesn't seem to be
operating fully. And when I've spoken to
when I've spoken to um representatives
from El Rio uh about this it's it's not
totally clear to me that if there are
any funds dedicated to this issue that
go to El Rio. Um but yes, so just a
little update.
All righty. Any others?
Okay. So, all those in favor of the
motion, please signify by saying I. I.
I. Any against? Motion carries.
And mayor, based on the passing of the
motion, we will finalize a resolution
with those modifications. We'll put it
on the next meeting for formal adoption
by the mayor and council. and we're we
will share a copy with Pima County um so
they can consider the request.
Thank you, Vice Mayor. All righty. Thank
you all. Thank you so much, Bobby.
Thanks, Coach Zeke. Nice to see you.
All righty. So, the next item is item
10. Um,
Councilwoman Lee requests at this time
for mayor and council to discuss
non-disclosure reform and transparency
in the city of Tucson for NDAs.
Councilwoman Lee, thank you, Mayor.
Well, I brought experience that we all
went through as a community and as a
mayor and council recently with Project
Blue. Um there were a lot of challenges
that we experienced leading up to that
decision and I thought this was a good
opportunity in the spirit of continuous
improvement to take a look at what we
might want to do differently so that we
can have better outcomes in the future.
Um, as many of you are well well aware,
the Puma County Board of Supervisors um
through Supervisor Allen's leadership
have had this similar conversation,
actually this exact conversation. And
last week, they passed a series of
changes to their NDA process. And so, a
couple of those changes that they made
uh limits on the NDA duration. So,
previously an NDA could be in effect for
5 years. That moved down to two years.
They made a few other changes in terms
of timeline. um focus a greater
transparency for the board of
supervisors. So now the board receives a
confidential quarterly summary of all
active NDAs so that the board at least
is aware of what conversations are
happening. Uh they also changed some um
timelines around when NDAs expire. So 90
days before a vote of a public body
including like the zoning commission um
the NDAs are no longer in effect. So
there is public transparency and
transparency for all of the decision
makers in that process at least 90 days
before any vote. They made some other
changes around their template and also
enhanced due diligence triggered by NDA.
So for example, if there's an indication
there may be um serious intent to move
forward, this could trigger um impacts
on water to be evaluated, impacts on
air, climate and public health, etc. So
um ultimately I just wanted to bring
this to our attention for action. Um, I
think it would be a good idea for us to
consider something similar to what the
county is doing. And there may be some
other great um, ideas that other
jurisdictions across the state or
country are doing. Um, but really just
in the spirit of transparency and
enabling us to make the best decisions
possible and make sure the community has
as much information possible. Um, I
think it would be great for us to do
that. So, I'm really curious to hear
what my colleagues have to say, but
mayor, in the spirit of moving things
along, I will throw a motion on the
table real quick. um prior to discussion
if that's okay. So, I want to move that
mayor and council direct the city
manager with the city attorney to bring
back a policy on the use of
non-disclosure agreements and economic
development projects that align with the
board of supervisors new policy and any
other best practices from other
jurisdictions that will address our goal
of streamlining our process, focusing on
transparency and ensuring Tucson stays
competitive while keeping the community
informed.
Second.
There's a motion and a second.
Um, and I do see some hands up. So,
Council Member Cunningham,
your honor, I think this is a good idea.
We should go for it. Let staff get
started.
Any others?
I just want to thank Council Member Lee
for, you know, keeping us um lock in
step with what the county board of
supervisors is also doing so that we all
know um uh yeah, we all have the same
guidelines in place. Thank you.
Any others?
Well, for me, thank you so much,
Councilman Lee, for uh following up,
making sure that we stay tuned and
focused um on this issue. I too um
believe that the more information we can
uh share with the community as quickly
as we possibly can is important. um if
other cities and towns in Arizona have
policies regarding non-disclosure
agreements uh that we can align with. I
think that uh the work being done by
Puma County uh to clarify processes is
important for the city of Tucson.
But I too
I don't I think it's not just about
non-disclosure agreements which would it
would be good to have an aligned NDA
policy with Puma County but I but I
think it's really about aligning
uh the vision and priorities of the
mayoring council in the community to the
opportunities that our economic
initiative teams goes out and looks for
us. So yes, it's about
uh transparency in in uh NDAs and those
processes, but it's also having an
understanding by our economic
development team. Um
what is it that our community and mayor
and council can uh can can support
um in terms of uh job creation and
economic development opportunities in in
our city. So it is more than just NDAs
and those processes but it is about our
economic development team understanding
uh what we want to see in terms of job
creation in our city. So it's way before
uh we get to a place where there's an
NDA
um in place. So um any others? Council
member D.
Mayor and I agree with you completely,
Mayor. Um it seems like our initiatives
program has not been aligned with our
values about labor, with our values
about environment and climate um
combating the climate um problem and
achieving climate resiliency. Um and
there's there's there's other values
that need to be incorporated so that
we're just not opportunistic and the
company from way across the ocean wants
to do something. Let's go out and reach
the companies that share our values and
will be an asset to our community. I
think we heard that loud and clear in
the opposition to Project Blue. Um I
also know that we there are some NDAs
and I don't even know what they are. I
think I might know one. Um and I I
imagine the practice is the council
member who's might be affected gets gets
a briefing but we all don't. So, I liked
and I don't think you mentioned them,
Council Member Lee, about us getting uh
a a report of all the one NDAs in
existence and then um in executive
session um get a deeper dive into some
of the projects um before they go
forward. Um so, looking forward to to
staff coming back with stuff. Thank you.
Thank you, Mayor.
Council member Ulik.
Yeah, thank you. I appreciated that part
as well, just understanding what MDAs uh
the city has signed on to and and I and
really I think the public may be uh most
interested in the attached template of
the um policy that that is being
contemplated. And I think uh the one of
the most important provisions to me is
the public records exception. um because
it's kind of what I would have assumed,
but this makes it very explicit and
clear that the county or the city were
subject to Arizona public records law
and therefore we may receive public
records requests that implicate some of
the information that would could be
regard regarded as confidential or
proprietary, but were a public entity
subject to public law. And so the
provision here is that if we get a
request like that, our obligation would
be to notify the private entity involved
and they would have to seek uh an order
from superior court in order for the
public entity not to release that uh
specific information. So I think this is
kind of what would be more expected,
right? and I think what what uh all of
us as electeds and city officials are
accustomed to in terms of transparency
expected. Um, so I just again really
appreciate that um, we are taking a
close look at these examples and what
the county put together and I um, so I
appreciate as well, Council Member Lee,
that you're keeping us on track and just
encourage folks to review uh, the um,
uh, the template because it's very
important.
Any others? Any other commentary?
All righty.
What are the expectations in terms of
turnaround on this item?
I will defer to the city attorney with
your transition just what what timeline
feels um reasonable for you all.
Honorable mayor, members of council,
council woman Lee, um I think uh giving
the next city attorney uh a little bit
of time u is wise. I think that there's
a good obviously a good starting point
um to um work from here with what the
county's already done. So maybe like
three meetings out would would be a good
time to come back.
That sounds good. And then to the city
manager, we could still work on uh a
briefing to understand what is currently
at play right now. Right. In the
meantime,
honorable mayor, members of the council,
absolutely we can begin that briefing
immediately. Um there's only five or six
NDAs in effect at this moment and we can
get that scheduled with you pretty
quickly and go through those and um I I
agree the the 60-day uh time time frame
is very reasonable. We can get that
done.
60 days.
And I guess for me um it's important um
executive sessions if there is an NDA
executive sessions to explain to mayor
and council at the same time
um
what you know company is interested in
um in coming to Tucson and what their
what their needs are, right? what is
their environmental because I know that
um part of the conversation at Puma
County
um is
I think it's like values aligned right
environmental assessments not just
economic development assessments and uh
job creation assessments but what are
their needs in terms of use of water and
energy and um you know um its effect on
the environment.
um when it comes to our needs. That's
that's what I mean I guess by values
aligned to uh mayor and council in the
community. Anything else? All righty.
So, all those in favor of the motion,
please signify by saying I.
I. Any against? Motion carries.
We move on to item 11. Time has been set
aside for a discussion on the fiscal
year 2026 budget and revenue updates,
including additional and new taxes and
fees. Mr. Manager,
honorable mayor, members of the council,
joining me here at the table is our
assistant city manager and chief
financial officer, Anna Rosenberry, for
a brief presentation. This is really
we're just now in the first quarter of
the new fiscal year, which means our
minds are already turning toward the
next budget. Um, but it's really just a
real quick update snapshot of where
we're at and uh we expect to have a
study session uh scheduled with you over
the coming months uh to address a
variety of different financial issues.
But I'll turn it over to Anna for today.
Thank you, manager, mayor, members of
the council. This is a brief update. I
don't think I've had a two slide
presentation to you guys in quite a
while. So, kind of enjoy it. Not that
you aren't lovely to sit here with.
Thank you. Um so as you're aware since
adoption of the budget in June, we have
um been implementing and monitoring how
that financial plan is going. Um your
FY26 budget was a balanced budget. And
if you recall during development of that
budget, there was significant focus in a
number of key areas. We looked for and
discussed operational efficiencies that
we could we could find in developing
that that funding plan. Um, a number of
cuts were made particularly within your
general fund. I think about $18 million
or more were identified. Um, there were
reductions to um under underperforming
programs. Um, we particularly looked at
how we were spending on outside
professional services. Um and there were
a number of longtime vacancies uh within
the our general fund operations that
were um eliminated. Those positions were
eliminated. Much of that was done so
that we could increase efforts and
investments in other key priority areas
of the Maring Council. Um particularly
in fire and emergency response, um
community safety funding for our Viva
and Thrive programs. um and investments
in infrastructure in particular um
trying to uh allocate more money on an
annual basis in the general fund to
capital um and equipment replacement. We
also spent a fair amount of time talking
about discussing the implications and
trying to gauge um what was going on at
the state and the federal level with
important streams of revenue and program
funding. Um, and as you recall, this
spring in particular was pretty volatile
and uncertain um, when it came to state
and federal funding. A lot of that uh,
situation continues to exist for us. Um,
since uh, adoption of the budget, you've
been receiving some off agenda memos
from the business services department, a
monthly update um, in July and August.
And then we had the study session in
early August to discuss additional
revenue options. Those are all key parts
of our implementing and monitoring the
budget plan. So, as the city manager
described, we intend to come back in
August. August in October. It'll be um
the second meeting in October is the
plan right now um to give you an update
on our first full quarter of completion.
We will have been through July, August,
and September. um spending and
collections. So, we'll be reporting to
you in October on how it's going. At
that point in time, we are going to um
update our five-year forecast with um
changes in the financial picture that
we've seen since adoption of the budget.
Um, as each week goes by, some uh
milestones get passed, some different
activities occur, and we have a a little
more clarity on what the future is going
to look like in that five five-year
picture within the general fund. And
your executive leadership team has also
been spending some time developing um
what we're calling the FY26 spending
plan. how can we land the FY26 budget um
the way that we intended to regarding
bottom line spending versus revenues.
And so um we will bring all of that good
information to you your second meeting
in October.
The memo that you received um for this
meeting also meant to um return to you
with some particular information that
you asked us for um at the August 6th
meeting. um you requested more
information on liquor license in liquor
license fees that are charged in other
jurisdictions in Arizona. So you see
that we reported back on all of the
series of liquor license taxes that the
city of Tucson charges and what um
corresponding jurisdictions of Phoenix,
Mesa, Scottsdale, Tempe, and Chandler
charge for those items. And then the
business services department went ahead
and did a comparison assuming that
Tucson applied each of those individual
community separate schedules um to our
cadre of licenses that are issued in our
jurisdiction. And you could see kind of
a whatif scenario um for what would we
be collecting in liquor license revenue
if we were charging that other
jurisdions's
um fees.
Um you also asked us for some additional
information regarding the applicability
of public utility taxes. Um in
particular the team is reporting back um
that the public utility tax is based on
being applied to electric Tucson
electric southwest gas and Tucson water
utility charges. Um but public utility
tax currently doesn't apply to uh Pumac
County wastewater or the city of
Tucson's environmental services charges.
Um, and that there is no public utility
tax currently charged for internet or
cable television services. Although
there's a piece of those bills that
might be tied to rental of equipment.
Think if you rent your DVR machine or
something like that um that uh might be
taxable in those categories, but general
broadly the service the utility service
itself does not fall under the city's um
public utility tax. Right now,
we've also given you um some
conversation and update on our timeline
for the implementation of the additional
new revenues. As you recall, on August 6
during that study session, um you
authorized staff to proceed um in six
different areas for additional revenues.
Um,
we have since been working to implement
a new law that was adopted regarding
notification for fee changes. Um, and
the business services team, it's it was
particularly House Bill 219 that was
signed into law in May and becomes
effective
um on September 26th. Um, we're still
working with Department of Revenue to
make sure that we implement that
correctly, notifying all of the
appropriate parties as we go about
implementing the additional revenues um
that we're looking to implement this
fall. Um but barring any major changes
with department of revenue, we expect to
have,
let me look at my exhibit here.
Um we expect that the earliest meeting
date that we will back be back to mayor
and council with official action on
those items would be the October 21st
meeting. We have already posted to the
city's website the action uh
notification that we're aware that we
need to make. Um, so that's been posted
for a couple of weeks now. And so this
fall we will be pursuing all of the
various steps to implement those
additional revenues, hoping to um have
the effective date of those revenues be
in January of 2026.
Mayor, that's the update that I have for
you this afternoon. Well, thank you so
much um Miss Rosenberry for the update.
I really appreciate it. I want to thank
you uh and director business services
director Angel Oz Milum
uh for keeping um us informed uh for
doing such good work. Um we have been
fretting and concerned about the ducier
uh flat tax and the consequences of that
flat tax. Uh I have also been very
concerned about um uh the President
Trump's tariffs and how it they are
affecting Tucson and our revenue. Can
you talk a little bit about um
uh how it's affecting our revenue um and
how we what we need to think about in
the near future?
Um yes, mayor, council members. So, uh,
the team has has been monitoring a
number of our local, um, revenue sources
for a number of months, basically since
January. Um, as you might recall, um,
during the first, uh, few months of the
calendar year, um, we had been seeing a
decline in local sales tax revenues um,
and had made an adjustment in the middle
of developing the budget. we had
adjusted those revenues downward with a
new projection that we were seeing local
slowing in in you know economic activity
local sales tax. Um that that slowing
has continued. Um we will um as we
report back to you in October, we are
not just keeping an eye on lo the local
sales tax revenues. We're also looking
at the p local public utility tax
revenues, the use tax revenues, the
hotel tax revenues as well. And we're
seeing a bit of volatility comparing
collections to prior years. Um but uh
but the numbers are down. Um we're
trying to bring together um good
projections
uh and update you on that in October.
How about the the the flat tax on
corporations and uh income tax?
Um mayor, we had also seen reductions to
those amounts. Um I think the latest
information that we had received from
the state was that those state shared
revenues were going to be another $1
million below um the numbers that they
had that we had based budget on. Um, so
I think at the state level they're
they're seeing those um collections um
continue to
soften I guess is the word that they
would use, but not meet the mark of
prior um estimates. And we receive
estimates on those revenue sources I
think on a quarterly basis. We'll be
sure to share the next update that we
get with the mayor and council.
Okay. Um Councilman Lee and then Council
Member Cunningham. Thank you, mayor. Um,
also appreciate the monthly updates and
staying on top of things. Um, appreciate
too you mentioning the um, cuts that
have already been made, $18 million from
the general fund. You gave a few
examples, and I know I'm kind of
annoying by continuing to ask about
this, but before we are asked to vote on
raising the public utility tax. I would
like to be able to speak to exactly what
we're cutting. You mentioned
underperforming programs, but I think
people are really going to want to see
where we are making the cuts
specifically prior to increasing rates
on them. So, I feel very I mean, and if
no one else wants to hear that, just
please send them to me, but I really
want to know specifically to be able to
help tell that story. We all want to
know apparently. So, that will be really
key if you want to get my vote for
raising that fee. Well, and the public
utility tax um might disproportionately
affect lowincome residents. And with
Tucson Water, we have a very robust
lowincome program that helps
um Tucson water rateayers
pay their bill. But um Tucson Electric
Power and Southwest Gas also have a
low-inccome program, but it's not as
generous as uh the Tucson water program.
So, I too am interested in terms of uh
what the public utility tax
um and how it's going to affect our
low-income residents. And so I think we
need to be
careful as we threat ahead
um because we know that public utilities
usually
uh just um pass the expense uh over to
the to the end user. So
Council Member Cunningham
a few things. One of the things that uh
was really interesting to me that
actually stuck out was that we're one of
the only jurisdictions where the liquor
store is lower than the beer and wine
store. And I didn't really like that. Um
I think it should be a lot harder to do
the liquor piece, especially if you're
doing minis. I'm about to bring some
stuff forward about minis and about um
liquor uh liquor based items that are on
the floor and not secure. um that's
where we're having a lot of problems. We
had a kind of the beginning of what's
going to be a pretty robust convenience
store discussion over the next few
months and I just really that that's one
thing that really stuck out to me. The
other thing that was interesting is that
while Mesa quote unquote has the lowest
of all the categories, they have the
highest issuance fee. So what they do is
they charge you basically like a hundred
bucks to apply and then they give you
but they they when you get your liquor
license they charge you a lot more. They
charge you $2,000. So it's a much it's
it's a much I guess it's a more fair
practice and that uh at least they
didn't give us a $1,500 check and then
get rejected. And so I think that's a
really good thing. And I think that's
one of the things that hurts us at the
liquor board is that when we send a
recommendation of no,
the the person actually had to already
spend $1,500 to get a no from the city.
Well, maybe we might want to take a page
out of Mesa's book and charge them the
2,000 when we issue the liquor license,
but only charge them a few hundred bucks
when they apply. and then keep our fees
the same, you know, consistent with
Phoenix. Though, I'd like to tweak them
a little bit in that we can have uh I
think we should have a higher number
absolutely for liquor stores and even
for bars. So, I think there's some
opportunity there and it won't generate
a a significant amount of revenue, but I
definitely like the idea. It really
makes it easier to
uh to basically say, "Hey, get your
ducks in a row with the neighbors before
you get your liquor license because you
only had to spend a couple hundred bucks
on a license application instead of like
1,500." So, that was the one thing that
stood out out with me in the liquor
license piece on the utility tax. My
question on the utility tax is I didn't
get it clear. So, can we do the
wastewater thing or not?
Yeah. Yeah. Um, Council Member
Cunningham, Mayor, members of the
council, we're still investigating that
as an option. If you recall, there were
five of the six items that it was
returned to us with these, and there was
one item that was continue to
investigate and explore with the county.
Um, and we are still in the investigate
and explore phase.
I guess the big question is I'm not a
big fan of raising our bills for our
residents, especially. I don't really
want our residents paying more for
electric electricity than the people in
the county go for. And that goes in to
turn to the issue that we have with the
transit occupancy tax.
There is value to going to the
percentagebased formula and not taking
the four bucks that there is some value
to that. Um, but there's not a lot of
value of raising it up when we're not
competitive to a point where if you're
in the county right now, your total tax
uh liability per night is 12.05%.
If we raise ours to more than about
14.95,
we're just not going to be competitive.
And some of the bigger groups that come
into Tucson will defer out to Westward
look and to uh La Paloma and places like
that anyway. And so I don't really want
us to lose. I don't want our hotel years
to be at a disadvantage. Um if we need
to raise it a year or two later, that's
fine. But if we're going to convert, we
should do it in a pretty re revenue
neutral piece. That's something that I
want to let people know. I'm not going
to vote for anything more than 14.95 if
we switch. Uh and the last piece
was um
with the short-term rental um piece. I
think the short-term rental is really
important, but I think it's actually
time we put the long-term rental piece
back on. And as as we we've been ftting
this for a long time because we're
worried about um
some of our our property managers
passing it on to tenants, but my issue
is is that I think some of the practices
not we have some good actors too, don't
get me wrong, but some of the practices
that we have with and the struggles that
people are are just able to even get a
fair lease right now is pretty bad. and
we're spending a lot of resources trying
to help people get housing starts,
helping getting into apartments and a
lot of that is we're we find ourselves
toe-to-toe with the housing the property
managers. So, we probably need to like
recognize that and take a look at those
things. So, that's kind of where I'm at.
Um, I just wanted to make sure that I
was clear about where I am with all this
stuff because I don't I don't want to um
have any surprises.
Thank you,
Vice Mayor.
Uh, thank you, mayor. I just want to
make sure that we don't lose sight of
how this conversation started. It was
about talking about transit fairs. So, I
just want to, you know, keep that in
front of us. Um, and as we're continuing
to have these conversations about the
city budget, I think it's important that
the conversation doesn't always go to
what can we cut and how do we do more
with less. Um because if we're looking
at our own household or business's
finances, the question isn't just about
cutting. It's about how do we increase
our revenue so that we can not just meet
the bills, but also provide for the
things that make life fuller for us. So
whether that's investing in our kids,
expanding our businesses, or saving for
the future, we recognize that income has
to match that vision. And so I think
it's important for us to think about
this organization in the same way. um we
have a basic obligation that we need to
meet but we also have aspirations as a
community whether that's safe streets,
parks, housing, climate resilience. So
if we we are only talking about cuts or
making sure people know that we did all
the cuts um before we instituted new
fees and taxes which is the only way
that we can get revenue um per um state
mandate in our city charter. We're
shrinking the possibility of what we can
build together. So, I think that we need
to remember that increasing fees or
taxes isn't just about taking more. It's
about investing more in ourselves so
that our city can not only cover the
basics, but also, you know, create that
future where we're all thriving and
growing in ways that our community
deserves. So, I just wanted to add that
to the mix.
Council member Lick,
thank you. Yeah, I I would agree and I
think we've really tried to to uh stay
competitive and make sure that we're in
line, if you will, with the region and
other um jurisdictions in the state. And
uh Council Member Cunningham, I I will
be very interested in looking at the
hotel piece. And I I recognize that part
of it is the raw rate uh uh that we're
looking at, you know, 12% versus 14.95.
I really want to make sure that we're
getting apples to apples comparisons
because many of the resorts that are in
the outlying areas also do charge extra
fees like straight up a resort fee for
just the the privilege of staying at a
resort versus what probably many of the
hotels and accommodations in Tucson uh
charge. I and I don't want to lose track
of the vacation rental piece and I
apologize. I think I'm just losing track
of my own thinking on this, but whether
we can have differential rates for
vacation rentals or ADUs that are used
as vacation rentals versus long-term
rental properties. I don't know whether
those are for example characterized as
commercial for um property tax purposes
and also whether we could differentiate
in terms of the hotel or the rental
taxes that are charged. Um, so I I I
we've discussed that the impacts of
short-term vacation rentals on our
public safety, our roads, and all kinds
of parks, all kinds of things are
different. And so if um I'll be
interested in in looking more closely at
that as uh as we proceed. Thank you,
Mr. Tamir. Honorable mayor, members of
the council, uh to that very point, um
the recommendations that were moving
forward was to differentiate the Airbnb
or vacation rentals. Um also convert it
to a percentage, but then have that
percentage be 1% higher than what is
charged in a traditional hotel?
[Music]
Are there any jurisdictions that charge
differently for liquor licenses
based on
calls for service,
bars, I'm thinking convenience stores,
bars,
hookah lounges. I'm not sure. I'm just
I'm just thinking that there are certain
um establishments that use much more of
our resources
uh very specifically with uh Tucson
Police Department and the service for
calls there.
Does that
exist even?
Mayor, members of council, I believe the
answer to that is no. uh and because uh
because of the
u parameters of what uh parameters that
were authorized to base a fee on versus
a tax.
[Music]
Any other questions, comments, thoughts?
Right. Thank you so much, Miss
Rosenberry. Really appreciate it.
Well done. Item 12. As requested by
mayor and council, Tusan Water will
provide an update on PAS for the second
quarter of 2025. Mr. Manager,
honorable mayor, members of the council,
joining me here at the table is water
director John Kamik and he will um lead
us through the update quarterly update
on PAS and then uh at your pleasure,
we'll roll into the next item as well.
All right. Good afternoon, honorable
mayor, members of council. Uh, today I'm
going to provide you with an important
update on the city of T on how the city
of Tucson is addressing per and poly
floral alcheal substances commonly known
as PAS uh, in our water supply. This
summary reflects our second quarter 2025
activities and outlines
ongoing regulatory, technical, and legal
developments. As a reminder to the
community, Tucson Water's drinking water
is free of any known impacts of PAS
compounds. The water department
continues to closely monitor all
drinking water sources for PAS. Earlier
this year, the EPA has reaffirmed
national standards for PFOA and PFOS
while reconsidering regulations on other
PAS compounds. Although compliance
deadlines uh are being extended
nationally, Tucson is not waiting. We
are already operating under stricter
internal guidelines. For example, we set
operational targets of less than two
part per trillion for PFOA and PFOS some
time back and we will maintain our own
operational standards for the other
compounds while EPA continues their
reviews to ensure the safety of our
system locally. 24 drinking water
production wells have been removed from
service and eight more are in emergency
only status. From April 1st to June 30th
of 2025, we collected and tested over
300 water samples at our water quality
lab with results showing that all
portable water serve remain below our
strict internal targets.
On the groundwater cleanup side, several
major projects are underway to treat PAS
contamination at its source. Um, the
Rolph Park groundwater treatment
facility began drilling a new well last
year, though further work is needed and
necessary due to lowered than expected
yields of water from the first well at
the tarp. AOP facility. Construction of
a new pre-treatment system is 15%
complete with full operation expected by
the summer of 2026. The tarp
pre-treatment system is predominantly
being funded by the state of Arizona
with a 25 with $25 million in accessible
funds. In cooperation with ADEQ, the US
Air Force Air National Guard, and Tucson
Airport Authority, uh extensive remedial
investigations are ongoing throughout
the community. These include installing
treatment systems, conducting soil and
water testing, and developing long-term
strategies across the impacted areas.
The Air Force, for instance, has already
begun operating a pilot PAS treatment
system at plant 44 and is designing a
permanent plant targeted for completion
in 2028.
On the federal and state side, in May of
2024, EPA issued an emergency order
requiring the Air Force and Air National
Guard to present long-term treatment
solutions for the Tucson area
remediation project. Wellfield, while
the Air Force originally disputes some
of the EPA's authority, it has pledged
to meet cleanup responsibilities under
the federal law. The Department of
Defense has also directed all service
branches to prioritize cleanups where
PAS contamination most affects drinking
water. At the state level, ADEQ remains
a critical partner to us here in Tucson,
providing funding, oversight, and
coordination. Uh, for example, the
nearly 25 million that has been
allocated Tucson water for that PAS
treatment system construction at TARP.
On the financial side, Tucson has begun
receiving payments uh just after the end
of this second quarter, but I'll report
it today. Tucson has begun receiving
settlement payments from the national
PAS litigation against companies like 3M
and Dupant. Our first installment
amounted to nearly $4.9 million uh
representing 20% of our anticipated
share from the largest settlement pool.
These funds will help to offset the
significant cost of treatment and
mitigation that has occurred to Tucson
Water customers over the years. Um on
the community side, uh Tucson Water
continues its commitment to public
outreach. In April, we presented updates
at the unified community advisory board
meeting. Uh we also provide refreshments
and food at those meetings. uh ensuring
the transparency and open dialogue with
the public. This October, the UKAB will
be honoring its 30th year of existence
with a special get together and
commemoration at their scheduled
meeting. In short, Tucson is leading
proactively in protecting our drinking
water from PAS. We are ahead of federal
timelines, investing in treatment
facilities, and partnering across
agencies to both remediate contamination
and secure funding for long-term
solutions. Um, while challenges remain,
especially with regional plumes and
ongoing litigation, our community can be
assured that the water we serve
currently meets current safety standards
and will remain well below federal
limits. Thank you, honorable mayor.
Thank you so much for the update, Mr.
Kimck. really appreciate everything that
you and Tiswater staff do um to deliver
safe, clean water to our residents and
to our customers because I know that it
is we have customers inside and outside
the city of Tucson. So, you mentioned
that we received uh uh $4 million
um uh remediation funds uh most recently
from our 3M Dupant
um lawsuit.
um how are we investing those funds and
how much has the have the uh Tucson
water customers invested in uh PIFA
remediation that hasn't been recovered
yet.
Honorable mayor, members of the
councils, uh yeah, that that's a
continuing issue. Uh so the the Tucson
water customers over the last 10 years
and particularly why we've been dealing
with this has been uh probably more than
$50 million uh based on our our analysis
of what those impacts have been. Um a
calculated study of the loss of more
than 30 wells and how that affects the
Tucson water system overall. You add
above that on those loss of assets. So
it could probably easily be close to
hund00 million of impacts that we've
suffered. So this first trunch of uh
remediated um or sorry the of the um
litigation related to the manufacturers
uh will be going back to Tucson water to
help support ongoing mitigation efforts
that are continuing to come forward. Uh,
one of those is the whiffle loan that we
recently have to deal with PAS on the
northwest side of town. Uh, and the
treatment facility will be building
there to help build our resiliency back
in an area where we're critically uh,
struggling with supply.
Any questions, comments on this item?
All righty. Thank you so much, Mr.
Kimick. Really appreciate it.
We move on to the next item. Time is
reserved. Item 13. Time is reserved for
mayor and council to review andor
provide direction to staff on several
water related items, including a
Colorado River update 2026 cap water
purchase and the city's drought
preparedness and response plan. Mr.
Manager,
honorable mayor, members of the council,
this is our annual opportunity to give
you these updates. Um the timing of it
is fortuitous and also intentional uh
because every August we know what the
conditions are on the river, Colorado
River for the next year. So we know what
uh delivery schedule can look like and
every October 1st we have to file our
order for CAP water. So we um today we
seek your blessing on on that on that
cap order as proposed. And again I turn
it over to water director John Kamik.
Thank you, honorable mayor, members of
council, city manager. So, today I'll
provide uh with you with a comprehensive
update on Tucson Water's key priorities
with respect to our main water source,
the Colorado River. We will discuss the
status of the Colorado River situation
as alluded to by uh the city manager,
our 2026 central Arizona project or CAP
water, and the current status of the
city's drought preparedness and response
plan actions. Together, these efforts
represent Tucson's commitment to
long-term water security, regional
collaboration, and leadership in
conservation. On the Colorado River
update, we continue to face historic
drought conditions on the lower Colorado
River Basin. Tucson has been a leader in
proactive conservation, participating in
voluntary compensated system
conservation agreements to help
stabilize Lake Me. Over the last several
years, under what we refer to as the
bucket one agreement with the Bureau of
Reclamation, Tucson has left 50,000 acre
feet in 2023, 30,000 acre feet in 2024,
and will leave another 30,000 acre feet
in 2025.
Earlier this year, council approved an
amendment to extend this through the
year 2026 with up to 50,000 acre feet
conserved, compensated at $400 an acre
foot. separately in the last year under
the bucket 2 proposals. Tucson is
conserving will be conserving this year
um 2,800 additional acre feet in 2026
through long-term system efficiency
project. And that project for us is the
advanced water purification facility,
also known as the Pure Water Tucson
program, which is now about soon to
enter design and is scheduled for
completion in 2031.
These efforts combined with those of
other basin partners have kept river
conditions above critical thresholds.
Still, the Bureau of Reclamation has
declared a tier one shortage for 2026 uh
on this past August 15th. This reflects
where the modeling for the uh water
elevation of Lake me isn't anticipated
to be on January 1st of 2026.
The latest on the post2026 negotiations
are as follows. The United States has
put forth a challenge to the upper and
lower basin states and tribal nations to
have a draft settlement and plan by mid
November of this year. Based on recent
opinion pieces by our ADWR director Tom
Bushki, those negotiations continue to
struggle.
The ultimate final resolution to this
reconultation will be in March of 2026.
Uh let us continue to hope these
negotiations continue to gain some level
of momentum prior to these deadlines. As
conditions develop over the next several
months, I'll ensure the mayor and
council on briefed on any changes
on any changes perceived or real that
may ultimately affect the future water
orders for Tucson and our partners
on our 2026 CAP water. Uh every year,
Tucson must submit delivery schedules
for CAP. Uh for 2026, uh after
conservation commitments that I just
mentioned, we plan to receive 91,391
acre feet of water down from our full
entitlement of 144,191.
Our storage priorities for next year
will be as follows. The first 21,000
acre feet will go to Puma Mine Road
project to ensure that that facility is
used to its maximum potential. Uh we
will also uh honor our full deliveries
to our agricultural uh groundwater
savings facilities partners in Pimac
County and then additional recharge at
our clear water facilities in Ava
Valley. Tucson will also though continue
to serve as a storage partner for other
cities and tribes. Phoenix next year
plans to store 20,000 acre feet with us.
Town of Gilbert 500 acre feet, Poria
2,000 acre feet and Scottsdale 5,000
acret. And then locally, Oral Valley
3500, Veil 1,500 acre feet, Morirana 42
acre feet, and the Pasco tribe,500 acre
feet. Altogether, 34,042
acre feet of other people's waters will
be stored in Tucson's recharge
facilities for regional partners. To
highlight this evolving role that we are
taking at the utility, we are going to
be rebranding the Clearwater program as
the Water Bank of Tucson. This reflects
how our facilities now function as a
statewide resource banking water for the
future and strengthening resilience not
only here at home but across Arizona.
On the drought and preparedness and
response, uh Tucson will water will
remain as recommendated to be in a tier
2 drought response condition even though
Lake meat is a tier one. Our measures
are
our measures are tied by sectors in the
tier 2 responses for city facilities. We
are we are continuing to roll out
advanced metering infrastructure to
better monitor water use and detect
leaks. And the first phase um with city
and other partners over 20,000 meters
focusing on reclaim commercial and
city-owned properties will be deployed
through a whiffer grants. We've removed
over 144,000 square feet of turf in the
parks, saving 5.2 million gallons per
year, well above our original goal of
55,000.
For residential customers, we've
identified nearly 9,000 households
exceeding water use guidelines by 250%
or more. Outreach will continue uh with
those customers, including audits and
conservation services.
By doing this the last several years,
customers who have acted in cut usage by
an average of 20%, saving 5.3 million
gallons annually. On the commercial
side, programs to encourage
non-functional turf removal uh led by
this council already eliminating over
88,000 square feet and saving 3.2
million gallons per year with more
projects on the way. Outreach campaigns
promote skipping over seating for winter
lawns. Other additional a uh whiffer
grants for funding retrofits and
low-income multif family housing with
strong participation from our
underserved communities. Our commercial
customers will also benefit from that
AMI roll out, automatic meter
infrastructure rollout, receiving
real-time usage data and alerts. And
then rate adjustments approved in 2023
now apply summer search charges to our
commercial accounts over 9 months
instead of six, encouraging conservation
during peak demand periods. Originally,
um, Tucson budgeted for our full API
allocation of 144,191
acre feet at $39.
uh per acre foot in 2026 for a total of
uh potential expenditure of 37.2 million
across the two um fiscal years. However,
with voluntary conservation, we expect
to receive the 20 million in
conservation for leaving another 50,000
in Lake me. And additionally, we
anticipate 2 million in revenue from the
Phoenix AMA partners and 473,000
in revenue from Tucson AMA partners for
their storage with us. Um,
this not only offsets reduced deliveries
but also reinforces our reputation as a
responsible regional partner. The income
associated from these conservation
efforts will continue to support needed
infrastructure upgrades to our water
resource facilities and the purchase of
other water credits like the recent
purchase of effluent credits from the
Bureau of Reclamation that happened
earlier this summer. So, in summary,
Tucson continues to partner with others
to safeguard the Colorado River through
voluntary conservation. Our 2026 CAP
order will be 91,391
acre feet. This order will support the
city's water needs while still
maintaining our leadership when regional
collaboration. The rebranding of the
Clearwater Program for the Water Bank of
Tucson positions us as a statewide
leader in aquafer storage. Our drought
response actions across the city,
residential, and commercial sectors
demonstrate that conservation is a
shared responsibility by all. Tucson
continues to pro prove that even in the
face of shortage, we can lead with
innovation, stewardship, and strong
partnerships, making our community one
of the most water resilient places to
live and invest in within the western
United States. Thank you. Welcome, my
Mr. Kim. Thank you so much for uh for
your presentation. I continue to uh be
so proud of the work that we all do here
in in in Tucson. Um we are a uh Tucson
water and the work that mayor and
council do uh for water conservation
um and water resource planning is really
showing not just statewide leadership
but national leadership in how we save
water. Um, so I want to commend you and
your entire Tucson Water team, our
colleagues on the council, the work that
we've been doing. Mr. Manager, Mr.
Tamir, you you were leading our Tucson
water um utility for many many years and
put us in in the path of of greater
um uh conservation in in our city. So,
um I mean it's pretty amazing that we're
storing water for Phoenix, Gilbert,
Peoria, Scottsdale, Oro Valley, Vale,
Morirana, the Pazuyaki tribe amongst
others. Uh and so that water banking is
important for us because we not only
like you said, John, receive the funds
um but also store this water in our
aquifer. And so it's it's a good thing
for all of us. Um
you know the the city is balancing
short-term voluntary reductions
um which we are receiving funds for
millions of dollars to do short
short-term voluntary and long-term
resilience investments in in in in the
second bucket two right we call it
for advanced water purification which we
are moving towards which is incredible.
Um
what concerns me is that we have
mixed messaging
in in our community and and we have been
doing so much conservation to Sonins,
right? We lead in terms of um amount of
water that we conserve per per resident.
Um and yet we here
so we're in a good safe place in terms
of our water resources
um for now and in 250 years from now. Uh
but then we hear the drought, the
continuing drought that is happening to
the Colorado River. And my biggest
questions I guess is how is it that the
federal government when is the federal
government going to step in and help
lead the upper basin and lower basin
states come to a decision about the
Colorado River? That's one question. And
then two, uh
how do we look outside of just the city
of Tucson and Tucson water and what we
do? How is water being managed and
conserved
um in our um management area and that's
inclusive of Sawarita and Morirana and
Oro Valley and unincorporated areas.
The reason I'm asking this is that I'm
very very concerned
that
um uh Beal and other developers are
looking to continue to develop data
centers. Uh
not I mean mayor and council said no uh
to providing reclaimed water to project
blue, but I know that Bill is looking
within our area management um our area
management area uh to
um build data centers in our vicinity.
And so
we're doing good, but how about others?
And what is the accountability
uh of others uh conserving water into
our future? I we have been hearing about
Panel County uh having a massive mega
data center built. Uh how does that um
uh affect our water, etc. H how is it
that we're dealing with other uh
counties and water utilities within
other towns to attend to these concerns
that TSON has very clearly said they
were concerned about?
You want me to take the second?
Yeah. Yeah, I'll take the first one. So
on the first one related to the federal
government, uh it's been our
understanding that u the um the Bureau
of Reclamation and this administration
has been u very much engaged with all
the basin states and the tribes in in
trying to force these deadlines, the
ones upcoming in November and then
another deadline in March of 2026.
Um it um without without saying too much
uh I think the the biggest struggle is
the upper basin states um and and I
think that was clear in director
Bashadsk's op-ed that he put in the
Denver Post u which I'm sure was a put
in the Denver Post for a reason. Um so
um until those negotiations get further
along and hopefully further along uh the
feds may end up having to make the
ultimate decision if the basin states
cannot all agree together. So uh now
I'll turn over to second question as
city manager.
Honorable mayor, members of the council
regarding the actions of others. Um
there's there's a few layers to that.
one I would say is uh the um being
active participants at the state and
regional and national level quite
honestly uh by director Kami uh keeps us
well informed of what others are doing.
What is clear though is others don't
treat water the same way that that
Tucson treats water and this mayor and
council treats water. So there certainly
is um additional development uh using
large quantities of water and even when
that's um what we would say is
downstream from us like Panel County um
while a hydraologist might say that
doesn't affect us directly the reality
is putting more water strain on anybody
in Arizona or the region puts potential
risk on everybody. And so we have to be
very mindful of that and very vocal
about that and and interject where we
can. And then even in our immediate
neighbor neighbors um we have uh great
relationships with the other water
providers but not everybody is under a
municipality or a water district that
has the same um ethics around water use.
And the fact of the matter is there's
there are a number of ways that
groundwater can be exploited even in the
active management area um that could be
very concerning for us. So we are doing
what we can to track that and also have
your voices heard in those
conversations. I think that does kind of
relate to the one of the next item
that's been added to the agenda. I think
we can you know start touching on that a
little bit in that Puma County and
regional discussion. Um but uh we we set
a we set a pretty high bar here in
Tucson and we uh we know that others
don't don't don't behave in the same
manner and those are very real risks.
Council member Cunningham
few things. So the 53 we're leaving 53
acre 53,000 acre feet in the Colorado
and we're double dipping. We get cost
avoidance but are they giving us money
for it too?
Pardon me. I'm
so are we literally double dipping water
water reference that
we get we get paid for the 50,000 acre
feet that's the bucket one that is the
the the cash for water program the
bucket two the additional 2800 is the
first of a 10-year program and that's
for to get reimbursement for the
construction of the advanced water for
but we also get cost avoidance of what
we didn't buy
true yes
so it's a triple dip now because buckets
one two it's triple
I'm just saying it's triple that's
awesome uh number two Um, talking about
the
uh something that concerned me with this
and and the mayor touched on it when she
asked her questions. Um, is there any
leverage we can put on
not only to the upper basin but to the
lower basin um to kind of team up with
us. I know that there's some antiquated
things with the agricultural take in
California. There's actually, believe
it, believe it or not, one farm, one guy
that gets about as much water as the
city.
Um, bet you didn't know that. But, um,
has there been progress made with the
the cal the California folks kind of
became partners on this. Can you give us
an update a little bit on the efforts
they're making, too, because I know that
we we're not the only ones doing really
well right now.
Yeah, honorable mayor, uh, Council
Member Cunningham, that that's a good
analysis. uh the lower basin states,
Arizona, California, and Nevada have
come together uh to put forth lower
basin proposals jointly. Uh they still
they still have effects if those
proposals did move forward that Arizona
because we are a junior status in the
lower basin would would bear a brunt of
it, but California was willing to
participate as well. But those are just
proposals. It seems to um the the
biggest concern right now is the upper
basin states coming together and
guaranteeing a release of water from the
upper basin to get to the lower basin
for us to be able to have in those
sharing. There's two other pieces to
this and that is that with the lower
basin states exercising those rights for
me I wonder about what our rights are
along the Santa Cruz as it flows north
because comparatively I think that if
the Santa Cruz is flowing north and
Chris Avery has shot me down on this
like 15 times and now he's going to
shoot me down on it again but I'm going
to listen anyway
the river education but it will be a
long long time before any rights to the
Santa Cruz River are quantified and
before there's any uh allocation process
that occurs on the Santa Cruz River.
That's excellent. This leads me to my
last question uh this afternoon uh which
is do we
dang it.
I just lost my I had this one other
thing. It was they were all connected
and I didn't write them down. So, I'm
done. Thank you,
Council Member Doll.
Thank you, Mayor. Thank you, Director
Kamika.
Oh, I got it. Dang it. I got it. I'll
give you my last thing is
Okay, so we're still 7 feet down in Lake
me this year. Um, and was that because
of rainfall or was that because we
didn't put enough back in? That was the
whole point of all these questions to
was to give you guys an idea how we led
the way to try to rebuild Lake Me this
year and we still lost our seven feet.
Kind of want to get an overview on that.
All I want to step in and answer that
question. Um
what happened to Lake me this year? What
happened in the Colorado River this year
is perplexing to a lot of us who
followed the Colorado River for a long
time. And the reason for that is that
precipitation in the Colorado River
wershed during the last snowfall cycle,
so winter 2024, spring 2025, was about
90% of normal, but the runoff was about
50% of normal. So what that indicates is
dry soils, sublimation effects, and
other uh things that happen maybe
uniquely circumstances this year. Maybe
it's part of a longer pattern of climate
change, but
the the issue with the Colorado River
this year was not precipitation. The
issue with the Colorado River this year
was runoff.
Thank you very much. That's actually
really that was probably a big part of
this conversation today was that
we despite all the stuff we're doing,
just remember our water levels along the
Colorado and in Lake Me are really
fragile. So I I we got to keep doing
what we're doing and if we've got to
take off more to set an example for
other jurisdictions, we can. But
everybody in Lake Habsu City should be
thanking us right now.
Council member Do
Thank you, Mayor. Congratulations. Uh
Director Kamik, I loved your report. I'm
very proud of the work that Tucson
Water, you and your team, all the staff
are doing, especially in the area of
conservation. You missed a couple of
points.
I've seen some new TV ads
educating the public about Tucson's
water and it has a wonderful voice over
over artist. Who is that voice over
artist?
I I don't watch a lot of local TV fact
director Kami and he does a great job.
It's an accent that you can't miss. Um,
hey, the our conservation program, I I
like what you outlined uh that we're
doing that we got grant money to do and
it's clear that we get some more money,
we'll get we'll be able to do some
conservation, more conservation, which
helps us. And that's one of the reasons
I've been interested in the net zero
water to find another source of money to
to do these great things, especially to
help the low-income people um who can't
buy the apply the water um uh saving
appliances, etc. And it's great that
we're doing some of that. Um,
another important part of the
conservation program is the green storm
water infrastructure. We call it storm
to shade. They're doing great work and
and working in parks and along streets
and in other areas. Uh, kudos to them.
And in today's paper at Associated Press
article about our own Brad Lancaster,
the godfather of storm and rainwater
harvesting. And I'm so proud that we
have a program in Tucson Water that's
built on on the principles, taking them
farther and doing great work for the
city. Um, again, congratulations. Keep
up the good work.
Thank you. Thank you,
Council Member Wulik. Be super brief.
Um, when we take a reduction in our
allocation, that's a temporary thing. We
can always revert back to the full 144k
if we decide to. Correct.
Well, once we sign the agreement, we're
committed to to leaving water on the
river. So, but it's a yearby- year
yearbyear. So,
and this is anticipated to be the last
year that'll happen because the post
2026 negotiations might end up change
our access.
Excellent. And um and yeah, I think the
the entire uh water bank role that we're
playing um is is really extraordinary
that we're serving the entire state to
make sure that we're drawing down our
full Colorado River allocation because
you can lose
uh allocations at least at the time that
we were establishing that a decade or so
ago. it's there was a risk of uh
returning water to the cap project and
ultimately having those allocations I
think reduced. Um so that it's just an
extraordinary uh accomplishment. So
thank you and I think it's right to call
it the water bank of Tucson because
that's exactly what you're doing. Um, in
terms of reinvesting the dollars saved,
I'm I'm glad, council member Dah, that
you brought up uh storm water to shade
and and uh just talked to the city
manager about this. I just encourage us
to continue to push the envelope on uh
investing those dollars that we save by
not pulling down our cap allocation. And
one thing that occurred to me is as we
work in W six on storm water issues, uh
I think the regional flood control
district is a great partner. There are
huge projects that are envisioned for
storm water capture uh that the flood
control district does not have funding
for. But I'm wondering if there might be
a dual benefit of Tucson water
partnering with the district to capture
that water if it would be regarded as
recharge and if the storm water quality
is adequate. And I'm sure there are many
questions. What what are you going to
say?
The honorable mayor, council member, we
we are actually in a pilot program with
u Pima County Flood Control in the Rita
Ranch area. Excellent. So they're going
to be doing a large uh storm water
retention facility there and we're
participating in actually being able to
measure and monitor um storm water
recharge in the area of the aquifer. It
may not give us direct credits but it
provides uh environmental um you know
sustainability of the aquifer if we can
demonstrate that that retention of storm
water at that particular project does
recharge the aquifer success.
Oh my gosh that is amazing. that that
checks off so many boxes as you know
flooding mitigation. So I'd like to just
introduce you to a couple of locations
in W 6 where we would like to build upon
the success of the pilot as we
anticipate it. Um but seriously, I mean
that's largecale rainwater harvesting
and if it does perk to the aquafer um
and relieve the flooding that we're
seeing in some of our neighborhoods uh
that that's really great. So I I
shouldn't be surprised that you're
you're also ahead of us on that. I think
that's fabulous. So can't wait to hear
more. Thank you.
Thank you. And I just wanted to make
sure that we understand
um that being paid to conserve is going
away
um because of the Trump administration
uh really changing um uh uh the
uh the federal investment in uh
conserving water and paying the city of
Tucson um to conserve and putting money
back into Lake Meade. That was part of
the inflation reduction act passed by
the Biden Harris administration
that uh has been rescended by the Trump
administration. So I believe 2026
is the last year that the city of Tucson
and Tucson water will be receiving or be
getting paid to conserve. Correct.
That's what we anticipate because
because of the changing guidelines after
next year.
Okay.
Yeah.
All righty. Any others? Uh, Councilman
Lee,
just super quick and John, if this is a
two-hour conversation, just take it take
it offline with me. Um, it just makes me
wonder how
this probably is a longer conversation,
but if you can summarize it, how have
the conversations gone with the lower
basin states? I'm thinking,
do we look at all of our existing
allocations as cities and then it rolls
up to a state level allocation that
rolls up to a lower basin allocation?
And the reason I'm asking this is
because I'm wondering if all of the
conservation work that we've done
demonstrates that we don't need as much
water and how that might come into
effect in 2026 and beyond.
Okay. Um, honorable mayor, council
member Lee. So, the kind of the 30,000
foot level. So, the the primary
negotiators uh for us is the state of
Arizona and that's on combination of the
director of department of water
resources and the general manager of
central Arizona project who were a
customer of and then working with the
governor's office. So the seven basin
states, the 30 tribes, uh even the
nation of Mexico, that is all part of
the Colorado River Basin uh compact are
the ones that are meeting on that. So
our role uh is a customer of the central
Arizona project and then the central
Arizona project just uh as a reminder is
uh is actually a lower priority in the
state of Arizona because those that have
onriver access Yuma the areas along the
river they actually have on river
priority and then the CAP was created in
19 past after 1968. So those of us that
are on cap, central Arizona, southern
Arizona are actually even slightly lower
when it comes to the state of Arizona.
Uh but everyone knows the criticality of
having Colorado River water for the
Phoenix Basin and Tucson Basin. U so we
do have uh leverage as far as a voice in
making sure those negotiations take
place. Uh but water use changes all the
time. Uh I mean it's only 80 years ago
the majority of water use in this
aquifer was agriculture and residential
water use was very small. Um and now
residential use is predominant. We have
very little agriculture in the Tucson
basin and that occurs and that's been uh
evolving throughout communities and
throughout the wershed.
We'll have to have a follow- on
conversation for sure. So thank you
mayor. That's it for today for me. I
guess the only direction that I would
like to make sure is in your mind as you
move forward is
I'm just concerned about we are doing an
amazing job here in Tucson. I'm very
very concerned
about the um continued planning for uh
massive data centers that use a lot of
water in when we're still in drought
with the Colorado River. And so
that deserves, I believe, a a statewide
conversation about
um
this phenomenon, right? the the creation
of of uh water sucking data centers in
our state.
Uh honorable mayor, I I can assure you
that uh I personally have been engaged
in the data center conservation not only
um here locally but nationally and
internationally as this is a challenge u
throughout the world.
Thank you so much for an update Mr.
Tamir.
Honorable mayor, we would seek your
guidance to uh submit our CP order as
proposed. Uh
do you need a motion?
Yes, mayor. So moved.
There's a motion. There's a motion and a
second. Any further discussion?
Hearing none. All those in favor, please
signify by saying I.
I.
Any against? Motion carries. Thank you
so much, Mr. Kumik.
All righty. The next item is item 14.
Time has been set aside for to give
mayor and council the opportunity for
discussion and direction resulting uh to
matters that are pending in front of the
Puma County Board of Supervisors and
other regional jurisdictions. Mr.
Manager, do you have a report here?
Honorable mayor, members of the council,
we don't have a report per se because
this is our first time having this item,
but you saw I was joined by somebody
here at the table. So, um, similar to
the state and national, uh, matters, um,
I've asked, um, a member of our staff to
become the focal point for this
particular item. So, this is Jackie
Vega, project manager in our economic
initiatives office, um, who already is
engaged with some of the local
jurisdictions, and over the last, uh,
month or so, I I've asked her to become
involved in in all of the ones that
would be pertinent to this conversation.
um against her better judgment, she
said, "Okay." And um so uh today I just
wanted to make sure I introduced Jackie
to the team and you can begin to um
convey to me or Jackie or both of us any
of the matters that you see pending that
would be of interest. Uh with that, um
Mr. rank and I know that you've weighed
in on the titling of this and and maybe
some of the parameters around this item
such that it um remains compliant with
open meeting law.
Yes. And I would just encourage the
mayor and council going forward that in
advance of each meeting if there are any
particular things that fall under this
umbrella that you bring those up at the
agenda committee meeting so we can make
sure the uh agenda is appropriately um
descriptive so that you can actually
take action on things because I know
from experience how sometimes you have
to act very quickly something that's
coming up on a board meeting or uh
otherwise within the scope of this item.
Is there a report to be giving or just
Okay.
Yep. No report. Mayor,
welcome.
Thank you, Jackie. We appreciate um you
volunteering
to do this. I think for me, I'm I'm just
really happy that this item is now on
the agenda. I want to thank my
colleagues uh on the council and and the
city manager for pulling it together.
Um, I guess uh my intent with this
particular item is to have good
communication strategy uh with Puma
County uh for us to be able to report uh
to each other the work that we're doing
and the mutual work that we do um and
then how we can plan ahead
um to many times divide the work right
uh that we have in front of us. I know
that Pima County has certain
responsibilities according to um Arizona
revised statutes and and the city of
Tucson has certain responsibilities
that many times if we organize and
coordinate and speak to each other, we
can complement the services that we
provide our mutual residents.
And so that's my intent of actually
making it work for us. Uh both not just
the city of Tucson but for Puma County
as well. Um
wanted to ask the input feedback from
any of you if you wanted to see any
future um items on this agenda item. Uh
Council Member Ulik and then Council
Member Pettis.
Thank you. I appreciate that Council
Member Perez was really um the
instigator of having this called out on
our agendas. I think it's really a great
idea. So, just a couple of things that
come to my mind. One is that both mayor
and council and the board of supervisors
um adopted the prosperity initiative and
framework. And we've been talking more
about um just an accounting, if you
will, of how the county and the city are
each investing in different pillars that
are part of that framework so that we
can maybe get out of the dynamic that
can emerge of, hey, we're chipping in on
this. Why aren't you chipping in on
this? we need to look at it in the full
framework. So, I also want to thank the
county board of supervisors for looking
at early childhood education
um as their uh in their role as the the
library district um overseers
collaboration on the flood control
district. I think there are many things
that we can point to where if we
communicate and coordinate effectively,
we really um can can point to the ways
that to your point, Mayor, we're
coordinating and being more effective.
So, I appreciate it. Thank you. Along
the same lines and veins, I've been
working with uh Chair Rex Scott on a
Metro Justice um uh solutionsdriven
conversation about our justice system
and how uh the city of Tucson and our
police officers at TPD interact with the
system that uh Puma County is in charge
of, right? the county attorney, uh the
the uh superior courts, the jail system,
all of those pieces where we really have
to work on each other. I do want to make
sure that both uh Mr. Tamir and I meet
with um administrator Leesure and um
Chair Scott. Um, I do want to go back to
them and ask them how we report both to
the board of supervisors and to the city
of Tucson mayor and council on that
mutual work that we've been working on.
Um, I know that I've had conversations
with both uh, supervisor and supervisor
Allen on also bringing the piece on uh,
behavioral health. uh mental illness and
then the piece that Puma County Public
Health Department has been working on uh
with uh ROSAC, the opioid settlement
funds uh which is a very important piece
of our unsheltered homeless and the
fentinel public health crisis that is
happening in our streets. And so these
discussions should be had publicly
uh so that the community understands how
both Puma County and the city of Tucson
are responsible for each piece of our
unsheltered homeless uh concerns that we
all have. So um I I do want to bring
that uh to this table as well. Council
member Bettis. Yeah, I would just add
that since our last meeting, um it
wasn't too long ago that it became um a
a public notice that Tucson Electric
Power would continue uh pursuing the
development uh with BEL infrastructure.
Um I know that the Puma County Board of
Supervisors, I believe in their most
recent meeting, um had an executive
session relative to uh how they would
move forward uh with those intentions. I
think it would be good for us to stay
privy um to whatever actions uh they
might take uh following that item. Um
but also to speak to uh your point,
Mayor Romero, I think that there is a
growing um public debate about um
homelessness and public safety within
the region. Um and I feel as though this
item was a good first step. Um, but I
feel that to your point about needing to
have public conversations
um, not necessarily just the ones that
we're having uh, amongst one another or
uh, amongst bodies. Uh, you know, I
think I would really like to start
entertaining the idea of a joint session
between Puma County and the city of
Tucson. I think there are a number of
areas in which that um, we have some
standing relationships and could build
on them. I think that could range from
everything from uh public safety to
homelessness, substance misuse
prevention, uh to things as broad as
early childhood education and the ways
that we take care of our community
through Kidco and they might take care
of the community through PEEPS. Um so
all that being said, you know, I think
that that's ultimately what I would look
for in this item. Um is, you know, some
of the the Kickstarter conversations
around economic development. Um and then
I think really starting to entertain the
idea of uh more public discussions
between both bodies on these these hot
topics.
I absolutely agree. I think a joint
session is something that I have been
wanting to do. Um both uh chair Scott
and I uh talked about it as far back as
March of this year. Maybe it might be an
opportunity for us to be able to talk
about it again and plan uh before a
joint session before the end of the
year. I think we could have a 10-hour
session if we're not careful about how
we uh how we focus it, right?
Like today.
Um, so I I think that one of the
priorities that I've heard many of us
and you all talk about is unsheltered
homelessness and the uh fentinel and
opioid crisis happening on our streets.
Um, and and that could be something that
we uh start a conversation on. It
shouldn't it should be a normal thing
right that we gather and that we plan as
uh a city a county
uh with our shared residents. So, I will
um I will bring it up in the next
meeting that we have with the chair and
the county administrator uh that we're
all really wanting to follow up on this
joint session and focus it on um our
shared responsibility of of you know um
a regional concern which is our
unsheltered homeless crisis. So, um
thank you so much for bringing it up. I
I I will follow up on it. Uh, Council
Member Cunningham.
All right. Well, now you guys have
opened a whole Pandora's box here.
I'm fine with having an a joint session.
And that's important that we have it
about homelessness, but we probably
ought to mention the fact that,
and I there's no malicious
action by the county here. This is not
something that they've done where the
people there hate the city of Tucson and
blah blah blah blah blah. But we've
talked about it for a number of years
and that is just because of the
structure and the symbiotic relationship
we have. The county kind of sets the
city up for failure quite a bit. And it
isn't because they want to. It's just
how we're structured. Um it it's a
function of them providing municipal
services when they're not supposed to.
It's a function of uh they control the
wastewater and the
they control the wastewater and they
control the storm water program and we
do the water service delivery. That is
not symbiotic.
They actually build parks that we do not
get to count on our TPL score. That is
not symbiotic. So there's these like
things in government that exist
where we try to have synergy and we're
friendly and we try but it's been going
on for 30 years and
we were making progress during CO before
COVID and then we just kind of it kind
of fizzled out. So it's probably time
for that to come to a head. Uh the the
biggest example right now is that
despite
uh the fentanyl and homeless issues that
we're having in the city, despite them
being placed on the city, we have to
remember that a lot of that is a public
health crisis. That a lot of that is a
correctional crisis.
That a lot of that happens to flow
through the courts and the county
attorney's office. None of those things
are city government functions. Now,
they're not doing it on purpose and
we're not trying to set them up for
failure either, but we've really never
gotten to the meat of it. We've never
really sat in that room and gone, this
is why we feel it's screwed up. It's
like I'm not just saying we should have
a we can have a sit down about
homelessness, but we probably need like
group therapy. So, I'm serious, man. I
mean it it's not we do not have a good
relation. We have a good relationship
because everybody's good people. It's
really easy to make
things work the best you can when
everybody's well-intentioned and good.
And that's true for all the people in
the room. And that that's everybody from
from um the county administrator Leeser
to all five board members of the board
of supervisors. They're all good people
have our community in.
There's no malice here, but because of
the way it's structured and because the
state has that law where counties over a
million people
lose money per capita in state shared
revenues.
We We're just working against each
other. We we are naturally working
against each other. So, I'm going to say
that out loud for this item because it's
been on my chest for a long time and I'm
going to say it in this form and
hopefully we'll get some dialogue and
discussion for with it.
Uh, Councilman Lee, thank you. Um, I
appreciate you bringing this up. I've
been talking to different people about
this idea for probably two years now,
seeing the need to get us together. I
think we've had one joint meeting in the
time that we've been on the council. And
um, I think you're right, Paul. I would
not say group therapy. I would say more
of a facilitator that can kind of
workshop a specific problem that we want
to solve. So I like your point, mayor,
to take one issue that we want to
tackle, have somebody help facilitate,
we wear comfortable pants, maybe some
slippers, and we use our we use our
brains and we put our heads together and
really come from a solution uh mindset.
So I I love the conversation. Definitely
eager to have
Oh, you're Mike Rankin's going to be our
facilitator. Perfect. Okay,
Council Member Bettis,
I would add too, you know, it doesn't
necessarily have to be of the mindset of
uh coming together to address
necessarily an issue. I think it would
be beneficial for something as
significant as a communication strategy
ahead of RTA. Um I think we all have a
shared interest on transit right now. Um
I think that that is a move that is
beneficial to both parties. I think that
would also be a good item for
consideration um and how we ultimately
come together and communicate that to
the community. So um you know I think
that all around this is a really um good
move for consideration.
We will do that. You got all that?
Um I I think seriously um Mr. for Tamir.
I think we really do have to start
planning a joint meeting of the board of
soups and and the mayor and council and
and we can uh based on what I've heard
in terms of input from u my colleagues
is that we start with unsheltered
homelessness and the fentinel opioid
public health crisis. We are working
effectively on some pieces of that um of
those concerns.
um very specifically with the opioid
settlement funds. Th those that we
should get an update as to where we are
with that and um and then of course how
we move forward with continued uh work
together. So if you can help us uh with
that and of course the clerks will have
to um discuss as well. Um, and then the
next time we meet with Jan and with Rex,
we can we can try and pin down um what
exactly we we discuss within the
unsheltered homeless uh and fentinel uh
crisis. Is that good? Sound good? All
righty. Uh thank you so much. That was
Oh, Council Member D.
Thank you, Mayor. This is more of a
brainstorm. Um, but I was trying to
think of other jurisdictions that we
might be interested in hearing about.
And maybe some of them are not. Um, it
would just be a written report on what's
happening with them if it's not real
key. But, um, and some of us have great
relationships with some of these and
some of them don't even know what's
happening with them, at least in my
case. So like um Rio Noeo um the flood
control district puma county flood
control district
the school districts um the tribes
Pasuayaki and Donatum and PG separate
from RTA we hear a lot about RTA but is
PG doing other things that we should be
knowing knowing about and again that's a
lot of jurisdictions and maybe just
short or um diff different reports at
different times and what they're doing.
Thanks,
Council Member Pettis.
Sorry to add on to
You'll have the last word,
but but to his point, uh, both the
Sunnyside uh, Unified School District
and TUSD have propositions that are
coming forth this year. Um, I know our
conversations around them are always
relative to what we can do to serve them
and how they can uh maybe contribute to
some of our aspirations. But um you know
I think that that also might be a venue
for promoting some of those interests
and how we might build capacity across
all of our respective bodies. And so I
do like the idea of that as well.
Excellent. Thank you so much. Great
conversation. I think we have some clear
direction as to what to pursue next. Uh
thank you so much. Really appreciate it.
Uh thank you Jackie.
All righty. Our next item is item 15.
Time has been set aside for mayor and
council to receive an update on state,
national legislation, and regional
committees, executive orders, and
direction to any associated litigation.
Mr. Manager,
honorable mayor, members of the council,
joining me here is Stephanie Zamora,
who's been admirably filling in in our
intergovernmental relations capacity.
And so I will turn it over to Stephanie.
Uh, thank you, Mr. manager. Good
afternoon, honorable mayor, members of
the council. Another brief update um
again focused at the federal level for
the moment. Um so, Congress returned
from its August recess on September 2nd
and faces a full agenda with the se uh
September 30th deadline to extend
government funding with a short-term
continuing resolution. Um without
action, federal agencies could face a
shutdown when the new fiscal year starts
on October 1st.
Turning to housing. Um before recess,
the Senate Banking Committee advanced
the Road to Housing Act and while it has
not been scheduled for a floor vote,
senators may try attach it to a must
pass measure this fall such as uh the
defense bill or the continuing
resolution.
In the House, there's not yet a
companion bill, but instead financial
services leaders are working on
reauthorizing and updating the home
program with the draft to be expected
soon. Uh Mayor Romero, I'll pause here
in case there are any comments.
Um, yes. Thank you so much, Stephanie.
As I shared in our last study session,
the Road to Housing Act is a priority
for our city. Just in the past 2 years,
we've used um home funding to help more
than 230 households with rental
assistance, support the development of
209 affordable housing units, and
leverage over $71 million in additional
investment. uh housing really should be
a bipartisan issue and I'm encouraged
that Congress is approaching it uh
thoughtfully and in a bipartisan way. If
this matters to you, I'd encourage you
to reach out to your representatives uh
and let them know the affordable housing
policy is something we need Congress to
move on. Um, I am communicating with our
congressional delegation. Uh, happy to
have some sort of resolution uh,
September 23rd in terms of Congressional
District 7 and have a voice in Congress
for that seat uh, to be able to
represent Southern Arizona. I'm happy
and looking forward to that. Um, but
thank you so much, Stephanie. I'll I'll
hand it back to you. I know you had uh,
some additional comments.
Thank you, mayor. Just very briefly and
to wrap up. So, like I mentioned,
Congress has a busy fall agenda um with
action anticipated on the um annual
defense policy bill and other measures
that would include reform on the federal
emergency management agency, public
safety um proposals and extensions of
health related tax provisions. And with
that, mayor, that concludes the short uh
update.
Any questions, input, comments on this?
All righty. Council member D. question.
We have an item on the Ironwood Forest
National Monument um and protecting it
from executive order. Has there been any
um new information about the president
um uh acting to reduce its size?
Uh Mayor and Council Member Dah, I can
uh look into that and get back to you. I
we were speaking to our federal
lobbyists about this issue, so um I can
provide that answer.
Thank you.
Anything else? All righty. Thank you so
much, Stephanie. We really appreciate
the report.
All righty. We move on to item 16. Does
anyone have any items to remove from the
consent agenda?
Your honor, item A only to talk about
how it is.
All righty. So, item A in the consent
agenda. Councilman Lee. Thank you,
mayor. I would like to also discuss item
H, fiber to the premises. And I'm
pulling item uh M for discussion that I
own forest national monument discussion.
Any any others?
All righty. Got it. Perfect. So, um,
study session is adjourned. Oh, no. Item
17 is future agendas. Anyone any future
agendas right now? Hearing none. Um,
study session is adjourned. The regular
session will begin at or after 5. What
time is it right now? We're Okay, so we
are meeting at 5:30 p.m. We got an hour.
We'll see you about an hour. Everyone,
thank you so much. And Rankin, this was
officially your last study session.
Hopefully you feel good.
Thank you. We'll see you at 5.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
Come
on.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Laughter]
[Music]
Black baby.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Heat. Hey, heat. Hey, heat.
Hey,
[Music]
Everything.
Hey,
hey.
[Music]
Hey,
travel.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Happy.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat.
Heat
[Music]
up
here.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat
up.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey. Heat
up
[Music]
here.
[Laughter]
[Music]
N hey.
Down.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Oh,
hey.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Everything.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
Hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey.
down hey down hey down hey
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
Heat.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
Hey,
[Music]
hey, hey.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Nat. Hey. Hey.
Thank
[Music]
you.
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
Hey, hey, hey.
[Laughter]
[Music]
Hey,
hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.
Hey,
baby.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Heat.
Hey, heat. Hey, heat.
[Music]
Heyity.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Everything.
session. Thank you everyone for waiting
for us to start. Really appreciate you
all. Um let's go to roll call. And just
for the record, I want to uh mention
that council member Uli will be
participating electronically by teams.
Okay. Mr. Cunningham
here.
Mr. D
Mrs. Lee
here.
Mr. Pettis
Miss Sulik.
Is she on mute?
Can she hear us?
She's on mute now.
Can you hear us?
We can hear you now.
Can we
Can you make sure that you turn the
volume up on her, please?
Um, Vice Mayor Santa Cruz
here.
Mayor Romero
here. Uh, before we go to item two, the
city attorney will go over the rules of
decorum for mayor and council meetings.
Mr. Attorney,
thank you, Mayor. Arizona's open meeting
laws provide that members of the public
may attend and listen to the proceedings
during tonight's public meeting of the
mayor and council. Arizona law also
allows the mayor and council to enforce
rules and procedures for public
attendance at tonight's meeting to
ensure orderly behavior and to prevent
unnecessary interference with the public
meeting. So here are the rules that
apply. The rules require decorum and
orderly conduct by members of the
audience. No person attending the
meeting shall engage in conduct that
disrupts or otherwise impedes the
orderly conduct of the meeting,
including any statements or conduct that
interrupts persons who might be
addressing the mayor and counsel or that
disrupt the discussions of the mayor and
counsel themselves. The mayor has the
authority to ensure compliance with the
rules of orderly conduct. If disorderly
or disruptive conduct continues after a
warning, and this is that first warning,
the mayor may direct the removal of
persons from the chambers or recess the
meeting itself if necessary. If
disruptive behavior makes it necessary
to clear the chambers, the persons who
disrupted the meeting will not be
allowed to return to the chambers for
the remainder of tonight's meeting. And
as a final note, please be aware that
interfering with or preventing this
lawful public meeting from being carried
out in an orderly manner not only
violates these rules of participation,
but also title 13 of the Arizona Revised
Statutes.
Thank you, Mr. Attorney. Item two,
invocation, pledge of allegiance, and
appointments to boards, committees, and
commissions.
The invocation today will be given by
Carla inclan, city staff. After the
invocation, I ask that you remain
standing for the pledge of allegiance.
Good evening, Madame Mayor, council,
staff. Good evening, everyone.
We come together today with confidence,
seeking blessings for our meeting as we
pause to ask for guidance and support.
We urge our mayor and council to engage
in each discussion with open hearts and
a genuine concern for everyone in our
community. Let us listen to one another,
respect differing opinions, and unite to
build a better and more successful
future for our city. Amen.
To the flag of the United States of
America and to the stands, one nation,
indivisible, liberty andice for all.
Item 2D.
I don't have it.
All righty. Item 2 C.
I didn't have it on my page that time.
All righty. Um for item 2C, we have a
special proclamation.
Um
uh this very special proclamation is
given to uh Mr. Mike Rankin. It's a Mike
Rankin appreciation day.
[Laughter]
You don't have it in here.
So,
for the record, your honor, Mr. Avery is
not meeting the standards and decorum of
the council chambers.
So I would like to uh invite my
colleagues uh as I usually do for
special occasions whomever likes to
would like to join me to recognize Mr.
Ranken and his 30 plus years of service
to the city of Tucson. Mr. Rankin,
please join us.
I got you. I got you.
I mean, Ortega got a proclamation after
nine years. I mean, right.
All right.
So, so, uh, I just wanted to say, um,
today is the last meeting that our city
attorney will be serving for us in his
capacity as city of, uh, of Tucson
attorney. Um after 21
years of being the attorney uh for the
city of Tucson, uh rightfully appointed
the city attorney and 30 plus years 33
33 years of service uh for the citizens
of Tucson. Today was his last
everything, right? His last executive
session, his last study session, and his
last uh council meeting. and we all
thought that he uh deserved
uh a day of appreciation specifically
dedicated for Mike Rankin.
So
I know that we want to all add something
and the vice mayor suggested that we all
do it from the deis. Um, so we're going
to read the Mike Rankin appreciation day
proclamation
and um I don't know if any of your staff
would like to join us. I know that
Catalina's here and Sophia's here. Any
other family that wants to join us up
here? Uh, please join us. Uh, please
join us. I really would appreciate it if
you did because no in all seriousness uh
because anything I'm being recognized
for whether in this proclamation or
otherwise is the product of work of
other people and a lot of those people
are here tonight. Um and I can't tell
you how grateful I am to all of you for
everything you've done to support me.
So yeah, please join us up here. You
could you don't have to come all the way
up, but you can be right here.
brother.
All right.
Okay.
So, on behalf of the city of Tucson and
the office of the mayor, it is great
pleasure for us to recognize Mr. Mike
Rankin and create a very special Mike
Rankin appreciation day for his 33 years
of service to the residents of the city
of Tucson, mayor and council, his entire
team at the city attorney's office and
every single department director and
employee of the city of Tucson.
So,
I'm going to read my big font, my
granken.
That's a that's cheat code. That's
smart.
So whereas after earning his BA from
Colgate University and JD from the
University of Arizona, Michael J. Ranken
began his legal career with the city of
Tucson on August 17th, 1992. That's when
I graduated from high school. I'm just
want to say uh
the 1900s
in the 1900s
um as a legal intern just out of law
school and whereas he served as a legal
intern and prosecut prosecutor in the
city prosecutor's office for over seven
years and he transferred to the civil
division of the city attorney's office
in January 16th 2000 again serving honor
honorably and effectively as a line
attorney for over four years. And
whereas he was appointed city attorney
on June 1st, 2004. And whereas one of
the long he is one of the longest
serving attorneys in the history of the
old PBLO. His over 21 years of appointed
service has left a lasting impact on the
improvement of the Tucson community in
both the civil and criminal divisions of
the city attorney's office. And whereas
his service stalwart leadership and wise
council has guided three mayors, nine
city managers and 16 different council
members through much change and many
challenges including economic recession,
work furlows, the January 8, 2011
shootings and the CO9 pandemic and
social unrest.
And whereas his office also assisted
three city clerks to successfully carry
out 11 city primary elections, including
one recount,
10 city general elections and numerous
special elections, including bond,
franchise, and charter amendment
elections, as well as elections to
decide proposed initiatives. And whereas
he has attended 616
study sessions,
but who's counting?
U mayor and council meetings, numerous
special and whereas during his tenure
tenure, he supervised the preparation of
2,184
ordinances and 4,235
resolutions for mayor and council
consideration and adoption.
Whereas his office has also provided
legal guidance to the many departments
of the city, each one having its myriad
unique issues. And whereas he
successfully expanded the internal
litigation unit of the city's attorney's
office in size and subject matter scope,
saving the taxpayers significant monies
while spearheading the development of a
skillful and effective group of in-house
attorneys and staff to defend the rights
and interests of the city and its
employees against lawsuits. And whereas
he successfully defended the city's
charter-based partisan election system
multiple times against various forms of
legal attack.
And whereas he was recognized by the
public lawyer section of the state bar
as a distinguished public lawyer in 2016
and by the ACA as a distinguished
municipal attorney in 2023.
and with a career achievement award in
2025.
And whereas he has earned the respect
and admiration of his family, friends,
and colleagues as an exemplary civil
servant. And we will miss you and your
insightful guidance. We are grateful for
your leadership, legacy, and lessons
learned.
[Applause]
Now therefore, I, Raomero, mayor of the
city of Tucson, Arizona, do hereby
proclaim September 9, 2025 to be Mike
Ranken Appreciation Day in this
community.
[Applause]
[Music]
In witness whereof, I have here unto set
my hand and cost the seal of the city of
Tucson, Arizona to be affixed this 9th
day of September, 2025. Congratulations
and thank you for your service. My
[Applause]
I feel really old listening to all that.
How many ordinances? 616 study sessions.
It seemed like maybe only 600.
Um,
thank you all so much. Uh and as I as I
mentioned earlier as I was looking out
the folks here and I mentioned this uh
Thursday last Thursday when we had the
retirement uh event um you know my
name's at the top of the pleadings or at
the filings in court etc. Um but for 21
years it's been uh the every single
achievement, every single
accomplishment, every good result
produced by the city attorney's office
uh is a result of someone else someone's
work who isn't named Mike Ranken. And I
mean that um the
what I tried to do was I just tried to
give these exceptionally talented folks
the space that they needed to do their
job as best as they could and to support
them and let them know that if things
maybe went a little sideways that uh
it'd be okay and I'd have their back. Uh
and the reward I got was uh
extraordinary support from them. Uh and
I'm grateful. I'm very grateful to all
of you.
Uh the other thing I'll talk about uh
because
as you can imagine the last
especially the last several weeks has
been a time of reflection uh look back
on 33 years or especially the last 21
years
um and all the things that happened some
of which are mentioned here and really
only one thought just kept coming back
to the surface which is just family. Um,
I never would have had the opportunity
to have this career at all if it weren't
my uh for the support of my family. Um,
not to mention to be able to do it for
so long for 21 years. U includes my
parents. Um, my dad who was a professor
at the UVA who taught teachers. He
taught a whole generation of teachers uh
who went to work in Tucson. created a
writing program that lasted for over 40
years at the university. Uh my mom was a
teacher uh at TUSD, a science teacher
and a junior high science teacher. Um my
brothers and sisters are just
extraordinary. Um my sister Cynthia is a
nurse who provides hospice care. Talk
about truly important work, right? Um,
brother Tom, who's here, um, is, uh, a
longtime prosecutor, longtime, uh,
prosecutor with the county attorney's
office, now runs a division for the
Arizona Attorney General's Office, and
and I want to make sure this is on the
record, who is the best attorney in the
family, and I mean that. I mean that.
Um, my sister Janine, a teacher,
elementary school teacher, recently
retired after a career at TUSD.
Uh, my brother Dave, forensic
anthropologist who spent more than a
dozen years traveling all around the
world finding and exuming and
identifying uh the remains of killed and
missing American soldiers.
I mean, I was an attorney for 21 years,
but these are extraordinary people. Um,
and then of course there's my wife and
kids. Um, I'll talk about my kids first,
but I won't forget my wife
this time. There's a long story there.
Um, Sophia, maybe you're gonna see a
theme here, is a teacher, elementary
school music teacher. And my son Connor,
who can't be here tonight, um is a
videographer and illustrator and
animator and drone pilot and content
creator and music video producer.
Um, and you may have heard me mention
this once or twice, but my kids uh have
a band that's uh incredible and uh
perform all around the city and across
our region. And uh then of course
there's my wife, Catalina.
come here.
Uh who's an artist, she's a volunteer,
she's a band manager, uh more commonly
called the mamaager.
Um and she's the one who holds it all
together, uh especially me. Um, and so
when I said that my name's on this or on
the day of appreciation, which I think
should be like a week or a month, it
just
um it it's a family accomplishment and a
team accomplishment. Uh, and I'm
grateful to every one of them and always
will be
[Applause]
and to every one of you. um the mayor
and council,
it it was never lost on me for a single
day that in order to be able to do my
job, um I had to have the trust of the
people that I was working for. And I
don't take that lightly. Um it it was
something that uh had to be earned. Um,
and just the the graciousness that that
I received from all the elected
officials, especially all of you up here
tonight. Um, uh, I can't thank you
enough.
Thank you.
[Applause]
Yes.
Oh, can we do a picture before you all
leave? Can we do a picture with all of
you with your mic?
It
too.
You are very tall.
[Laughter]
It's coming.
Okay.
[Applause]
Hold it.
And that was wonderful. Okay. Now we go
on to item 2D.
Appointments to boards, committees, and
commissions.
City managers communication number 277
dated September 9th is received into and
made part of the record. May I have a
motion to approve the appointment in the
report, please?
So moved.
Second.
Okay. There's a motion and a second.
Any um discussion on this?
Hearing none. All those in favor of the
motion, please signify by saying I.
I.
I. Any against? Motion carries. Are
there any uh personal appointments to be
made at this time?
None. All righty. We move on to item
three. And this is the uh summary of
current events. And I know that some of
my colleagues h want to say um some
words uh to Mr. Rankin. So I think this
would be the most appropriate space uh
to add the comments. Uh but item three,
we need to read the heading. Mayor and
council report summary occurring events.
City manager communication number 275
dated September 9th is received into and
made part of the record. This time has
been scheduled to allow members of the
mayor and council to report on current
events. These are to be current events
of activities within the community, not
position statements on policy issues.
Um, and I know that my colleagues all
want to add their voice uh to thanking
Mr. Rankin. And we'll start with the
vice mayor.
Well, I'm going to start with my current
events, mayor. Um, so on, uh, Sunday,
September 14th at 8 a.m., um, the public
is, um, asked to join the Sunnyside
Foundation for their annual Gives Week
health and wellness fair. It's an
opportunity to connect with community
resources and local organizations at
their free family-friendly health and
wellness fair. Um, that also coincides
with the Burrito Run and it will be
taking place at Mission Manor Park at
6100 South 12th Avenue. And then on
Friday, September 19th at 5:00 PM, join
the Sunnyside Foundation for their Gives
Day block party. Um, come celebrate and
the work towards hitting their
fundraising goal of $125,000.
Um, join the fund at American Eco with
music, performances, and more. Um,
American Eco is located at 1439 South
4th Avenue.
Um, and um, Mike,
um, I at 23 years old when I first met
you, I used to wonder how you didn't get
tired or bored of your job.
Um, I was supposed to go to law school
and then rescended that um, uh, that
trajectory. But um spending so much time
with you in executive sessions is making
me realize that you're a nerd when it
comes to problem solving and you always
made um legal uh jargon sound, you know,
very approachable in a way for us to
understand. So I always appreciate the
way that you educated and informed us.
Um it's also been really annoying to
watch you move with the pep in your step
since you announced your retirement.
Um I'm really happy for you. Um, and it
was moving to see the outpour of love,
um, wisdom and silliness at your
retirement party. So, thank you for
including us in that celebration. Um, I
also want to thank you for your over 21
years of service to the city of Tucson.
Um, you have been a steadfast leader in
your office. You have given so much of
yourself to this organization and we're
all going to be so much better off for
it. Um, especially this Maring council
who will go back and ask themselves,
what would Rink do? I wish you so much
rest, peace, joy, and adventure in the
coming years. And I want to thank your
wife and kids for sharing you with us.
And when you're ready to volunteer, I
have a couple of openings in some boards
and commissions. And I would love to
appoint you. Thank you.
Council member,
let me do a few things. This is going to
be a tough one.
This morning I was at the funeral for
Joe Caesar.
For those of people in Tucson who know
Joe Caesar, he was kind of a surrogate
uncle or godfather to a lot of people.
He actually was born on the south side
of Tucson. He went to Wakefield.
He lived in government housing most of
his life. uh joined ROC, taught at
Sunnyside High School. Um eventually
became a uh like he went to work for a
realy company.
Um he grew up in a class of there's
about 40 of them
that went to Tucson High between 1953
and 1956 that never lost a football
game.
Um,
ultimately he worked to start the
National Bank of Arizona, one of the
largest in Arizona. He built 5151 East
Broadway, also known as the Great
Western Bank building. It actually
housed IBM here when they moved here.
And above that, it's still the largest
office building square footage wise in
the city of Tucson.
Um, he was a Tucson concusador.
He served on the board of the uh
University Medical Center. He was in the
inner circle of Governor Reel Castro and
helped him get elected. And Senator
Dennis Deansi who even to the day he
died was his best friend. He served on
the Arizona Judicial Commission and
helped select judges. He had a constant
balance between charity, service, and
prosperity for the city.
I want to send out my condolences to
Larry and Jeff and the rest of the
Caesar family. Uh
they've his contributions to this city
are remarkable and we've lost another
Titan in Tucson.
I also want to talk about Llover
tonight. Uh Lazlover has been doing at
the Arizona Symphonic Winds on Saturdays
at UD Doll Park since I took office.
Um
the really cool thing is that he does it
at the Llo Beerus
uh amphitheater and llo was part of that
class. He even taught music at Tucson
High. The Winds are an all volunteer
community concert band providing a
variety of music for all ages, including
overtures, light classics, marches,
Broadway tunes, and adapted popular
music. All concerts begin in the park at
700 p.m. every Saturday in September.
Bring lawn chairs and blankets, a picnic
basket.
You have to have a permit if you bring a
bottle of wine, and enjoy the free
entertainment for the whole family.
This Saturday's program is really
special. It's featuring the Catalina
High School marching band. And last
year, Catalina High School didn't have
one.
That school's really doing well. Uh,
it's my dad's alma mater. So, it means a
lot that that's happening this week.
Which brings us to Mike Ranken.
So, first of all,
for tonight, if you'll indulge me, Mike
Rankin is one word. It's Mike Rankin.
There's no Mike. There's no attorney
Mike Rankin. There's no Mr. Rankin. It's
just Mike Rankin. So, as I describe my
adventures with Mike Rankin, every
single time I say Mike Rankin, you echo
and say
Mike.
So, let me tell you about Mike Ranken.
Mike Ranken.
One word. My dad made that up. He just
started calling him one day. He said,
"Paul, you need to call up Mike Ranken."
Mike Ranken.
And
so, it's September 9th. It's Mike Rankin
day on his Oh, wait. Sorry. It's
September 9th. It's Mike Ranken.
Mike Ranken
day
and we honor him in his last day as
Tucson's CA. That's city attorney.
Um, Mike Ranken.
Mike Ranken.
We give you tremendous gratitude.
But I don't want to speak with too much
platitude.
I ran out of space right there because I
knew I was going to start crying. Uh,
so the cool thing, some stuff I want
everybody to know about my ranking.
Mike Rank.
Um, we're both Rencon Rangers
and we've spoken as much as attorney and
client and you know in our professional
relationship. We've spoken almost as
much on the phone about that, but also
about things just everybody t everything
that Tucson's care about from music to
athletics to arts to traffic to the and
it's been an incredible ride. It it's an
amazing opportunity to have that
perspective all the time.
Um, the other thing I'll tell you is
that Mike Ranken
Mike Ranken
might we might we might not we might
need to start calling him John Marshall.
Now you're going to love this. This is
my favorite thing. So John Marshall is a
legendary jurist, right? He was the
chief justice of the Supreme Court. I
mean he's John Marshall, not Mike
Rankin.
Mike Ranken.
Uhhuh.
But what you don't know is that Mike is
about to become a roadie for his
daughter's band. Did you guys know that
Mike Ranken is going to be a roadie?
Mike.
Mike Ranken. Roie.
All right. Well, in 1992,
I went to go see Metallica. And
Metallica had been in a concert about a
week before that, actually three or four
weeks before that. and their lead singer
and rhythm guitarist James Hetfield
walked in front of a magnesium sulfur
stage explosive and burned himself and
he could not play the guitar.
So they got a legendary roadie named
John Marshall to play his guitar parts.
So now Mike Rankin shares
the distinction of the name John
Marshall and that he is both a legendary
attorney and now a legendary roadie. And
so for Mike Rank and I'm going to see
you quite a bit as you retire, actually
a lot more. So I'm really looking
forward to it. I'm looking forward to
seeing you tomorrow. And I this isn't
goodbye for me. I'm just I want I just I
guess the bigger thing I'd say is how
grateful I am.
It's just how grateful I am to have you
around and and it's a it's beyond a
profess it's a friendship now but it's a
calming thing. It's a it's a
every so often you meet somebody in your
life where after you talk to them,
you're either calmed down or you have a
little more pep or you just you feel you
know what you're doing and that helps
when you have someone like Mike Ranken
in your corner. The city's going to miss
you. You're going to be impossible to
replace and and I hope that the next
person does the job half as well as you
have and then we'll be just fine. Thank
you so much. You've grown into the best
attorney in the city and one of the best
city attorneys in the country. That's
what I really believe.
My turn. And I have a prop.
We are approaching tree planting season
and I want to encourage you to join with
many people who have supported the
mayor's million trees for Tucson
program. What are we at? 150,000 trees
about
150,000.
That's amazing. So, um it's easy to
plant a tree. You need a hole. And
there's some detailed instructions.
There's some places you can get cheap
trees. You can get two shade trees for
your yard through um for five bucks a
piece from Tucson Electric Power. One of
the better things that TE does. Trees
for Tucson, a nonprofit and our partner
in a million trees program. There's a
great variety of trees about this size,
30 bucks, and there's wonderful
nurseries all across town. Or you can do
what I did and take a seed and plant it.
This is a two-year-old, maybe
three-year-old uh planting. We need more
trees. They provide shade and love and
everything. And when I look at a tree, I
think about Mike Rankin.
Mike Ranken.
No, that's a horrible um transition, but
um thank you, Mike. I really appreciated
having you as my lawyer at your peak.
You did great work. And I think I told
you this once. Every so often I imagine
I'm in a remake of the movie uh Fear and
Loathing in Las Vegas and I'm driving to
Las Vegas in an open coupe having done a
lot of drugs and my lawyer is sitting
next to me doing the same thing. Nothing
to do with reality, by the way. But
that's that's how I imagine Mike Ranken.
Have a great retirement. Thank you, my
friend.
Councilman Lee,
I wasn't sure how Kevin was going to
follow Paul and now I'm not sure how I'm
going to follow Kevin, but it's it's
okay. So, Mike, a lot has been said
beyond the 33 years of service at the
city and the 21 years as the city
attorney. We're all so deeply grateful.
You know, I came into this work really
intimidated by legal stuff and every
time I call you and talk to you about
it, I say that the legal stuff is my
least strong area. But I always
appreciated how you were somewhat of a
teacher in executive session and you
always made sure that you brought us
along and that we thoroughly understood
everything that we were doing and I I
saw you as such a critical strategic
leader and a teacher really for me. So I
just appreciate that spirit that you
brought to the job. And then the other
piece on a more personal front is you
really modeled how to be in an executive
position and still put your family at
the top. And that's a hard thing to do,
but you lived it. Tim lives it. The
mayor lives it. So many of my colleagues
up here live it, but I really appreciate
how you have always demonstrated that
and shown um people who have younger
children how to grow up and be like you
when we grow up. So, thank you so much
for everything you've done for us.
Thank you, Councilman Council Member
Perez.
Uh my time has been short with you,
Mike, but I've observed you for about a
decade now. Um, and having uh been
around your family, uh, I know that
everything that has been said uh, holds
true. Um, and I think that to Nikki's
point, uh, you really are emblematic of
an executive that protects his people,
um, while caring for his family, caring
for his community. Um, and that's deeply
admirable and I'm appreciative for the
time that I have had uh with on council
with you.
Council member Oolle,
you're on.
She's not.
It's our audio.
I think it's Are you on?
Oh, she's on her phone. We could hear
her on the TV, but not in here.
Check.
Okay, we're we're checking.
We're checking Karen.
That's us, not you.
I was going to say the same thing.
So, I can speak for Karen. Yeah, she's
Mike Ranken is the favorite city
attorney I've ever worked with. Um,
regardless of which ward I was
representing at the time
and uh I'm just stalling Karen trying to
give you some time to get your audio.
Point point of air order, mayor. I'm not
sure this is proper um for the city
attorney to speak for a council member.
anything working or
There you go. We can hear you.
Nice.
Oh, well, that just shows you why I love
Mike Ranken so much. Um, and I'm going
to cry
because
um we we have been at this for a long
time, for 20 years. Um, Mike was the
attorney when I was first elected in
2005.
And so
um, Mike, I just respect you so much.
And um, as everybody can tell, who you
are hearing today is the mic that I've
heard every day of my service. uh a
humble, kind, respectful
uh good man. And um so thank you, Mike.
And I would guess that we feel the same
way that if in our service as you have,
uh you've represented the very best of
the people of Tucson, you reflect the
very best in our community and in all of
us. and I thank you for that. And um I'm
going to find out where the next gig is
so that we can have a beer. Thank you.
Thank you, Karen. Um well, you know, I
started for Karen working as a council
aid and um I remember very clearly uh
how attentive uh you were to a measly
council aid uh asking questions
um about
the law and how the law uh serves our
community and our residents. And so I
have known nothing other than Mike
Rankin as the city attorney of the city
of Tucson. And so I started my career
and service
with you as the city attorney. And um
it's been a crazy ride. It it it has
been an honor of my life to be able to
serve with you uh as a council aid, as a
council member, and as mayor. And every
piece of that service that I've given to
the community, you've been there and
then some. Um
and um you know for the people of the
city of Tucson, you should know that the
city attorney is a really important part
of service uh to our residents and
because of you and your leadership,
Mike, uh we've gone to bat for the
residents of the city of Tucson from
uh preeemption tries uh from the state
legislature
uh to standing up um against the
governor and preemptive strikes that
he's tried against the residents of the
city of Tucson
uh everything from our election systems
and how we choose our mayor and council
um to source of income protection to uh
your partnership uh with me throughout
SB 1070 your advice to us as a mayor and
council
um to you know most recently as mayor uh
going through co I think you told
Catalina
uh you spent more time with me and my
Cortega than you did with you her and
your family at the time. Um
it's true. I mean, we were up at 12
midnight making decisions
uh for the residents of the city of
Tucson and to protect them and their
health uh to the vaccines and our
mandate with vaccines to uh
social unrest
and custody death. Um trying new pro
pilots and programs and service to our
residents. Uh, it just has been
incredible and um I really am lucky to
have had
your experience,
your ethic,
uh, your commitment
to
our residents by my side since I first
started my service.
I I appreciate you and I'm really I'm
really happy that you get to
um say this is where I end. Uh I'm going
to be a roadie now. And and uh I've
always appreciated uh that from you,
your clarity and your sense of
responsibility to mayor and council, to
the city. um to your employees at the
city attorney's office and to and to the
residents of the city of Tucson. Um
I too appreciate your balancing of
family and um
and service to others. And those are the
values that make you such an incredible
incredible city attorney. but most
importantly such an incredible human
being. Thank you, Mike, for your service
to all of us. We're gonna miss you.
[Applause]
Thank you. I'm just going to say I love
Tucson and I thank you all for giving me
the opportunity uh to be in this
position uh for the city that I love.
All righty. Now we move on to item four.
City managers uh um summary of current
events.
City manager report summary of current
City manager's communication number 276
dated September 9th is received into and
made part of the record. This time has
been scheduled to allow the city manager
to report on current events. Mr.
Manager.
Thank you, Mayor. Uh, couple of
announcements for tonight before I go
into the Mike Ranken part of the show.
Um, I'd like to provide an update on the
temporary closure of Armory Park. Uh,
people have been hearing quite a bit
about that and so I just wanted to give
some context to that. Uh this closure is
part of our Tucson delivers
voterapproved parks bond program uh
which will bring more than $1.5 million
in upgrades to the park which will
include the planting of 80 additional
trees, new bunch new benches and picnic
tables, upgraded lighting, renovated
restrooms, a new dog park, irrigation
upgrades, and a new shade structure and
performance area. While we're doing
those improvements, we do recognize that
disclosure has affected a weekly effort
to provide food for unsheltered
residents in the area. In response to
concerns over that issue, city staff
have reached out to the service
providers, volunteers, and community
members to share information,
alternative food resources available
nearby. Uh we do deeply appreciate the
mutual aid groups, service providers,
and volunteers who continue to serve our
most vulnerable neighbors, and we're
committed to supporting these efforts by
offering alternate locations for food
distribution and ensuring the process is
safe and accessible for those in need.
Uh for those in need of assistance, the
city has a list of resources posted on
our website at tucsonaz.gov.
Uh, additional announcements are, um, as
I like to do during these times, um,
acknowledge great work by city staff.
Um, we recently received three awards at
the Arizona PL state planning conference
uh, across different departments.
Actually, the planning and development
services department won the planning
excellence award for the community
corridors tool, which was directed by
this mayor and council. The department
of transportation and mobility won the
great public places award for the stone
avenue cycle track and uh the project
activate el precidia was awarded the APA
Arizona southern section award for our
partnership with Rio. So congratulations
to all those involved in those wonderful
projects.
Having said that, if you're familiar
with the Dean Martin celebrity roasts of
the past, you may be familiar with the
comedian Red Buttons. And when when
somebody would be roasted, Red Buttons
would invariably come up and question
why that person would be having a
dinner. And today it's about why why
would Mike Ranken why would why a
appreciation day for Mike Ranken?
Father Isubio Kino never got an
appreciation day from this mayor and
council.
Former President Barack Obama who spent
time in Tucson never got an appreciation
day from this council. And even local
artist Sevilla Rankin and the sound
great musical band that they are never
got an appreciation day from this mayor
and council. So it does bring the
question why why Mike Ranken and but I I
I would pause and say I think numerous
reasons have been given. I'm just adding
my voice to it that uh this this job
would be impossible without a great
partner in the city attorney and I speak
for the many city managers that came
before me to say thank you for all of
your advice and counsel. I'm glad today
we didn't add number 10 to the list. Um,
and um, I wish you nothing but the best.
You have a wonderful family. They are
ready to have you. We're ready to be
done with you. And uh, I send you on
your way.
Item five,
liquor license applications.
City manager communication 287 dated
September 9th is received into and made
part of the record. Miss Clerk, please
read the liquor license agenda.
Your honor, on this evening's agenda, we
have two applications for new licenses,
one application for a person transfer,
and 14 special event applications. The
agent has withdrawn the application for
for item 5B3, Ignite Sign Art Museum.
All applications, all other applications
are in compliance with city
requirements. We received a written
protest for item 5B 5C9, the special
event at our mother of sorrows parish.
That item will be considered separately.
So an appropriate mo motion at this time
would be to forward items 5B1, 5B2,
items 5C1 through 5C8 and 5C 10 through
5C14 to the state liquor board with a
recommendation of approval.
So move.
Second, your honor.
There is a motion and a second. Any
further discussion? Councilman Lee.
Mayor, just to confirm with the clerk,
did we have some speakers on one of
these items for W 4 or would that be?
There was some speakers in support for
um the Circle K uh license.
Call them.
I since they took time to show up, I
just wanted to make sure if there were
folks who wanted to speak on the W for
Circle K item that there could be an
opportunity for that.
Absolutely.
Because they had to come a long way to
get to see.
Are we not cons? We're not considering
it separately, are we?
No. Okay. Oh, because it's if it's in
compliance.
Okay. Is it possible to hear?
Absolutely. Absolutely. Um
there are four speakers.
Call Andrea.
Okay. There are four speakers. Do you
want do you want to
I would love that cuz if they took time
to come here, I would love to get
Okay. So, um
do you want us to vote on the on the
motion on the floor or just
Well, this would be part of the motion.
So, so we'll we'll uh close with a vote
after the speaker. Andrea
uh Lenowitz Leovitz,
I'm sorry
if I'm massacring your last name.
Good evening, mayor, council members.
It's Andrea Lucowitz, attorney for
Circle K. Uh Council Member Lee, thank
you for uh letting us take a minute just
to say hello, let you know that we are
here. Um Circle K was here. We were um a
couple of weeks ago. We've heard you
loud and clear. We want you to know that
Circle K is here to work with all of you
to do the right thing for the community
that it serves and we are open to any
discussions. I um intend to speak with
Vice Mayor Santa Cruz tomorrow. We
already set that up and I we did call
your office um council member Lee uh
yesterday. I'm afraid we missed you. Um,
but if there's any questions about this
location, um, I'm here with Jordan and
Troy. You have our cards. So, if there's
anything or any questions that you have,
we're here to answer and happy to
discuss any matters.
Thank you so much, Andrea. If Troy or
Jordan want to add something, I think we
also have TJ.
Yes, Mayor and Council. Thank you very
much. I just want to give a shout out to
Mike Rankin. There you go, Mike.
Congratulations. And again, we are here.
We want to be a great partner. I'm a
local uh I've been a a Tucson resident,
grew up in Tucson. In fact, I live in
Paul's uh ward. And you know, I've been
loving Circle K. When I grew up, I went
to Circle K. And I want to make our
stores bigger, better, and nicer and
close down some of the older older yucky
models. So, appreciate anybody's
support. And we're here for any
questions you have. Thank you.
Any others? I also have TJ.
All right. Good evening, Mayor and
Council. Mike Rankin Day. Uh my name is
TJ Pritchette, a Tucson resident since
1993. Uh very proud and honored to be
here before all of you. I've been a
Circle K employee for about 5 years now.
I'll actually be directly uh overseeing
the operations of the location in
question this evening. um and happy to
promote the the confident nature with
which we operate our business and
responsible retailers within the
community. And again, just an honor to
be here before you and any questions you
may have, I'm happy to address or uh you
know, address any concerns that you may
have as well.
Thank you, mayor. Everything was in
compliance and we didn't hear any
concerns from neighbors, but I just
wasn't sure who all was on the speaker
card. So, thank you, mayor, for allowing
them to speak.
Thank you so much for doing that. Um
anything else on this motion?
All righty. All those in favor of the
motion, please signify by saying I.
I.
I. Any against?
Motion carries.
Do you have the one mother specially?
I don't have it.
I know I there's a
written opposition council member.
Santa Cruz.
No. Cunningham.
Okay. Uh, council member Cunningham, did
you want to um
Yeah, for the arma the arm mother of
for the arm mother of item. Uh, is
Tabitha here?
No, Tabitha. Okay. Uh, we had one
neighbor that we got the she sent the
letter in on the 14th and we got it
today. Um,
a lot of her concerns is parking. So,
this is what I'm going to do. First of
all, it's a weekend
special event license in a church, and
there's several board members on the
church that live in that neighborhood.
So, I got to say there's a symbiotic
relationship between the church and the
neighborhood. I mean, Hank Kriszik lives
right in the neighborhood and he's their
one of their deacons. So, I want to make
sure the big thing is is that the ne the
church one responds to the neighbor
because it seems like they didn't
respond to her. Her bigger issue is the
parking and some of the behavior on some
of the bigger events with our mother of
sorrows. So, I want to put that on the
record. Second thing I want to put on
the record is city man for the city
manager is I'd like to see if we can
have some parking enforcement for this
event on October 10th and 11th. And with
that, I'm going to move that we
recommend approval.
Second. There's a motion and a second.
Any further discussion?
Hearing none. All those in favor, please
signify by saying I.
I.
Any against? Motion carries. Any other
two considered separately? Okay.
Excellent. So, we move on to item.
Oh, this is Are you from our mother?
Yes, sir.
Do you want to do you want to come up
and say a couple things?
Manager.
Can you please uh uh uh speak into the
mic? My name is Steve the Paris mother
of sorrows and I wanted to uh appreciate
your your bringing up this matter. We
have reached out to Miss Grafton. I have
emailed her back when we first got the a
copy of the complaint. Uh it was the
first time anyone actually identified
themselves for a complaint and we
addressed it right away. I also sent her
a letter via uh US mail and I also tried
to call her uh a few times but her phone
never picked up. But I want to assure
her in the city that we take her
concerns very seriously. We want to be
good neighbors. Uh now that we know who
the person is, uh we have offered her uh
we're going to put u cones up over her
parking, make sure it's blocked off. We
have our security team now. We can
address her and make sure it's being
patrolled regularly. We will have
offduty Tucson Police Department uh as
part of our event and we will make sure
that any issues or any concerns that
they can take action right away.
Thank you, pastor. really appreciate it.
You're welcome.
Thank you. All righty. So, we move on to
item six.
Call to the audience.
Miss Clerk, do you have any
announcements?
At this time, the public is allowed to
address the mayor and council on any
issue except for items scheduled for a
public hearing. Call to the audience
will last 30 minutes and speakers are
limited to three minute presentations.
The green light will turn on when you're
called to speak. It will turn yellow and
beep once you have 30 seconds left of
your allotted time. When your three
minutes are up, the light will turn red
and the timer will begin beeping. If
that happens, please immediately
conclude your remarks.
All righty. We have our first speaker
who is Tom Ranken.
Mayor and Council, my name is Tom
Rankin. Uh, I live in Ward One. I'm not
a paid speaker and I know about the
three minutes.
Oh, wow.
So, I'm Mike Rankin's oldest brother,
one of five ranking kids. And I'm here
to thank city attorney Mike Rankin for
the distinguished job he has done for
you and the citizens of Tucson for 30
plus years, the last 21 as city
attorney. From time to time, brother
Mike would ask to steal a minute or two
during these uh mayor and council
meetings to recognize family member,
friends, whatever. And tonight, I
thought I'd take the opportunity to get
even I mean return the favor. Sorry.
Brother Mike, as you heard, got his
college degree at Colgate University
just like our father did. Um immediately
he faced the dilemma though that people
who get a bachelor of arts degrees have
if they don't want to be a teacher. What
what am I going to do? And the answer is
simple. You apply to law school. And
that's what he did. And he got admitted.
But shortly before law school, I heard a
knock on the door of my university area
apartment. And it was brother Mike. He
was just wondering if he might crash on
my couch for a little while while he got
his feet underneath him uh for his uh
going to law school. And I agreed. And
before he knew it, two years had gone by
and Mike was still on my couch.
That all ended in year three when he met
Catalina, which he calls the luckiest
day of his life. Um, he went off with
her. He got married and created a
wonderful family. So, Brother Mike
started his career at city prosecutors
and went over to city civil office for a
little bit. Then he applied for
magistrate position. And he was really
disappointed when he didn't get
selected. But he called me and he said,
"Look, there are people on the
commission and other city leaders who
said they have a better position for
me." and that turned out to be city
attorney. With their support, he got
appointed for the first time as city
attorney. He has served as city attorney
with honor, integrity, and distinction
over the last 21 years. He's been
recognized by the state bar and numerous
municipal law associations. He's
dedicated his time to the people of this
city, often at the expense of time with
his own family. And we've missed him
while he's been uh with you all in the
work he does for the city council.
Tomorrow he's going to step down and
return to his family where he can fully
concentrate on his other jobs. Chief
Rodian sound tech for Sophia Rankin and
the sound of course tie-dye clothing
artist. He's wearing some of it today.
Uh resident groundskeeper and repairman
for his own house and his best friends,
his birds, dogs, and desert tortoise,
the most recent addition. So, mayor and
council, I wish you the best of luck in
filling his position. I think whoever
you select better have big feet because
he's got enormous shoes to fill. And
brother Mike, I rank and families are
immensely proud of you and your
accomplishments. We're blessed to have
you back and we love you.
Thank you.
I was hoping for more stories.
[Laughter]
We haven't even started talking about
the fountain yet.
Thank you so much, Tom. Really
appreciate it. Um, Anthony Denophrio.
Good afternoon, Madame Mayor, members of
the council. My name is Anthony Donno. I
am the director of wages and benefits
for Tucson Firefighters Association,
Local 479. Uh today's decision during
executive session is monumental and will
shape the future of presumptive cancer
claims not only in Tucson but throughout
Arizona and North America.
When Tucson firefighters are called
upon, our response is ferocious. Be it
to a patient suffering from a cardiac
arrest, a construction worker trapped in
a ranch, a trench, or when the Tucson
house is engulfed in flames, we
selflessly risk our lives to protect our
community. The decision to disregard our
own well-being is not easy at all. Like
you, we have families of our own and we
want to witness the milestones and
achievements of our children and maybe
someday even hold our grandchildren.
Still, at the end of the day, your
Tucson firefighters cho choose to
prioritize the lives and property of the
community above that of our own
well-being. When we take action, there
is no room for uncertainty. Conversely,
when we submit workers compensation
claims for cancer resulting from
occupational exposure, there should be
no questions as to whether or not those
claims will be accepted. Now, knowing
that this mayor and council have our
backs when we are diagnosed with a
presumptive cancer, it provides us with
a peace of mind that helps justify our
decision to continually and willingly
risk our lives while providing selfless,
exceptional, and aggressive fire
suppression services to the Tucson
community.
While today is a huge step in the right
direction, we still have work to do. The
hazards your firefighters face are ever
increasing as our workers con
compensation claims for occupational
cancer. We owe it to our firefighters,
their families, and the Tucson community
to approve their workers compensation
claims for cancer resulting from
occupational exposure. And we owe it to
them to memorialize the process in our
labor agreement so that leadership
change does not have a negative
consequence on future workers
compensation claims for presumptive
cancer. Local 479 looks forward to
collaborating with you so we can provide
our future firefighters with the peace
of mind that they need to continue to
risk their lives for this community. Um,
I took office about a little over two
years ago now, and this was something
that I was tasked with by our members.
We have to figure out a way to increase
our coverage when it comes to
presumptive cancers. And I just want to
thank each and every one of you from all
of you. Um, today was monumental. It's
huge for for our people to be able to go
to work knowing that we are going to be
covered if we come down with an
occupational cancer. So from local 479
and from me I just wanted to thank you
all sincerely.
Thank you, Anthony
[Applause]
Reyes. Suarez.
Hello, Mayor and City Council. Thank you
for having me. Uh my name is Rey Suarez.
I'm a Tucson native and I'm speaking on
my own behalf. I'm here to address the
ever growing and pervasive mass
surveillance that's uh initiatives that
are popping around the city. Last time I
spoke was about the misuse of temporary
cameras and drones placed and operated
at community vigils that took place
around town. Um one for a vigil for a
person who died from ICE raid and the
other two from Palestinians who were
killed in the West Bank. Um, I don't
think there will be many here who will
doubt that that was a gross misuse of
funds and manpower. Um, but clear
intimidation of people using their first
amendment. Um, what I didn't get to
cover was the implementation of flock
license reader cameras around the city.
We need to stop the addition of flock
cameras. Um, even if they the company
claims that they're no longer a DHS
contract in other locations, the
national database has been asked through
leaks to ICE from local um, police for
deportation information. The Supreme
Court, I don't know if y'all if everyone
realizes, has just ruled that it's okay
to racially profile now for ICE. Um,
it's scary. I'm I'm terrified. Um,
we don't need to needlessly give them
access to all of our movement and our
locations as well. Um, not too long ago,
there was a policeman in Texas who used
out of state fa camera data to search
through 83,000 cameras to look for a
woman who was seeking a safe out ofstate
abortion.
Um, that's terrifying and that's wrong.
Um, and we shouldn't be in support of
those initiatives.
Um there are also reports of local
police not here but others who are
misusing that information to stalk ex
partners. Um
it's just too too much access too much
power for any any people to be using
honestly. Um
I understand that it's a mcurable
ambition to protect your citizens but
these initiatives there's just too much
avenue for abuse. um how long is this
data saved on these databases? Who all
has access to that? If you all can't an
answer me right away, I expect you to
find out and come up with some sort of
plan on that. Um there is responsibility
to adapt to regulation and
representatives of people in the system
whose privacy and leverage is at stake.
We desperately need constant constraint
against unchecked exploitation.
Um,
I don't know what y'all's strategy is
for this uh, fascistic government that's
popping up. To me, it kind of seems like
a far cry from bravery. I just want you
to understand that um, silence is
complicity.
Please step up and protect your
citizens. Thank you.
Councilwoman Lee.
Thank you, Mayor. I just wanted to let
you know um and let the community know
that next month we're going to be having
a conversation on this exact topic, the
use of technology and the data that is
generated from the technology, how it is
uh utilized, how it's stored, how it's
protected, and it's disposed of. And
we'll be talking a lot about the
policies behind that and citizen
oversight. So, I want you to know that
we hear you.
Thank you, Councilwoman.
Uh Kate Hutton.
Good evening, uh Mayor Romero and
council members. My name is Kate H.
Hotton. I am the co-executive director
of the Coalition for Sonor and Desert
Protection. I am authorized to speak on
their behalf tonight as a retained
speaker and I'm a resident of the city
of Tucson. So, I'm here tonight in
support of the proposed resolution uh
that is uh on Ironwood Forest National
Monument in front of you this evening.
The monument is a big part of the
coalition's history. So, back at our
very early days in the year 2000, we
work very hard uh for its establishment
and uh actually um expanding on the
boundary that was originally presented
for Ironwood Forest National Monument.
And so we still actually think of it as
our first big win was getting the
monument established. A few years later,
we helped to found Friends of Ironwood
Forest. They are here with us this
evening as well. Uh and they have been
stewarding uh that landscape ever since.
So around 2007. So that would be another
one of our big ones. We're very pleased
with their successes. So, we feel like
this resolution that is in front of you
this evening is very much uh carrying
forward that legacy that we've we've
helped put in place, working very hard
to make sure that that monument uh stays
uh part of our future here in the city
of Tucson uh well into uh the future.
So, it's important not just to us though
as a coalition, uh it's also important
to many others across southern Arizona.
As you know, many of us access the
monument from here in the city of
Tucson. Many visit to see wildlife that
are in the monument, including our
desert big horn sheep and many other
species that not only live in the
monument, but also travel through the
monument. So, we have about 100,000
visitors a year. Actually, it's closer
to 125,000 visitors a year in the
monument uh uh this uh around this time.
So, um but earlier this year uh there
was news of a threat from the
administration against the monument and
reducing its boundaries. Uh it's not the
first threat we've seen. It won't be the
last threat. So back in 2017, there was
a threat from that administration
against the monument and its boundaries
for resource extraction. So explicitly
mining, they want to see more mining uh
out at the monument and less
protections. Uh so and that is exactly
what we see today now in 2025 again. So
part two again this will continue into
the future. Uh so you are joining Pima
County, you're joining the town of
Morirana, you're joining many local
businesses and many constituents in
speaking up uh for the monument and
against the administration
and many future threats that we can
envision uh and also demanding that our
uh representatives and other elected
officials uh speak up for Ironwood
Forest National Monument. So, I thank
you for your continued leadership in
protecting the public lands that
surround us here in the city of Tucson.
And I respectfully ask for you to vote
in favor of this resolution this
evening. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Kate.
And stay with us because I've requested
that we consider that consent agenda
item separately. So, we we will be
discussing more on it. Thank you for
coming. Julie Ditmmer.
Good evening, Madame Mayor and Council.
Mike Ranken. Um,
I am currently recovering from a chronic
illness, so I might need to study myself
a little bit on the podium. Um, I am a
born and raised Tucsonian and I recently
published an op-ed in the Tucson
Sentinel about NDAs and Project Blue.
For anyone who is unfamiliar, NDAs are
private contracts that hide key terms
such as appraisals and price until after
deals are moving. That makes it hard for
residents to tell whether a deal is
fair. A even after annexation is ended,
be has been working through TE, a
private utility. That route makes an
Arizona's gift clause harder for the
public to identify potential gift clause
violations, which is exactly why
transparency matters. In plain English,
the gift clause requires that any public
deal serve a public purpose and give the
public roughly equal value in return.
You can't measure that if the documents
are hidden. I've already filed a public
records request for the appraisal. I
understand that these things take time
to process, and I know that the clerk's
office and staff are working hard, but
that's the point. Residents shouldn't
have to file requests and wait to just
to see documents that determine whether
a deal meets our constitutional guard
rails. That information should be posted
upfront. The current system makes the
process harder for staff, harder for
residents, and harder for you as elected
officials to build trust. The county
recently capped NDAs at two years, which
is progress, but Tucson can go further.
Here's a straightforward set of rules I
hope that Tucson can adopt now. One, cap
NDAs at 180 days with automatic
unsealing at first public notice. Two,
post appraisals, offsets, and term
sheets at least 14 days before votes.
Three, maintain a public NDA log with
titles, parties, date, scope, and
status, even if we can't see what's in
the NDA. Four, hold public hearings and
publish cooling method plus water/power
estimates for any special utility
agreements tied to unusually high
demand. Even if project blue fades,
another proposal will come. So, I hope
we can set the rules now so that the
next debate happens in daylight. And
please let me know if there is anything
I can do as a citizen to help. Thank
you.
Thank you so much.
Pedro Gonzalez.
Pedro Gonzalez
here with us.
There he is.
Uh, want to start this? Uh, don't start
my time yet. I I want to want to say
something to him.
I guess we're the same, huh?
Well, I had a a speech that I was going
to say, but I normally don't don't
follow speeches.
Um, I'm here because of the 10th Avenue
um housing that is proposed. Um
you know I I'm really concerned about
um this body uh mayor and council that
you know to this day uh the varios you
know I love my vario I'm from Vjo I love
my vario I know you love Tucson but I
love my vario my varios
and one of the things that we you know
we're always concerned about is how is
the city going engage with us. Are you
really going to engage with Are you
going to really give us lip service or
you going to take advantage of the
people of the of the brown people in the
vios?
Are you are you going to do that?
Because when they talk to us, they don't
talk to us. They don't talk to like you
guys talk to like talk to white people.
You talk to us down. Uh and so in 19 in
the city of Tucson displaced
all the families here in urban removal.
It was ethnic cleansing. 1966 I got to
live all that. I was 10 years old. I my
family's displaced.
We were displaced in in 1983.
200 units La Reforma housing projects
were demolished. Black and brown people
were displaced.
In 2003, the county chambers housing
projects were perfectly just like La
Reforma were good.
H housing the they the structures were
good. And what did the city do? They got
P money and they destroyed the
demolished over 200 units
of the of of of
Tony Chambers housing projects. Now you
the city's proposing 200 300 units all
rentals whatever you're calling it
affordable housing. It's not affordable
to us. affordable. I don't know what it
means to to you, but there's no such
thing in brown with brown people, people
in the varios,
uh, affordable because what what this
body has done and not personally say
anything, but what you guys have done is
cause gentrification, more
gentrification.
Thank you.
Oh, for the record, I have a letter
here. Would I give it to city clerk?
It's open.
Thank you, Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you,
Edward
Nino or Nino. Edward Nino.
Good evening, Mayor and Council. I'm
piggybacking on Pedro. I'm here to
address the council and the mayor on the
10th Avenue housing project situation
and how the residents of Bario West
Ochara are not happy at all with the
lack of communication between the city
and the residents.
We have had multiple meetings over the
last two years with various city
employees and have made multiple
requests to have questions answered
again and again and have been told again
and again, "We will answer you later."
Even though when we were told the
questions would be answered at the next
meeting.
This really shows a lack of respect for
the residents and the barios.
We get information in dribbs and drabs
and are just paid lip service to keep us
pacified. And now we have found out that
the infrastructure of the 10th Avenue
housing project is to begin this coming
October.
At the last meeting with the city, we
asked again for the dozenth plus time to
be part of the process and have a seat
at the table at the 10th Avenue housing
project. And we were told no again.
Residents were not needed there.
How can the city not let the residents
of not only Bario Achoa but the other
local barios to the project not be part
of the process when you're always
preaching inclusivity?
Why
no longer asking the city? We are
demanding that the city practice what
they preach inclusivity.
That the city from now on include the
barios
that Mr. Pedro Gonzalez comes from Santa
Rosa, Bario Lib, Bario Vjo along with
Bario Westo Choa in the 10th Avenue
meetings and that they are given notice
via mailers in English and Spanish
because many folks in these barios do
not have computers and it took us eight
months to get the city for Bario West
Choa to send out mailers.
also that the mayor and the city
councilwoman Lane Santa Cruz attend at
least a few meetings of the housing
project as they have not been to one
meeting since April of 2024.
As taxpaying citizens, we demand that
our dignity and rights be upheld, no
more and no less.
Thank you.
Uh
Mr. manager. I I really don't know
exactly where this project is at. I know
that uh both vice mayor and I attended a
meeting and then uh gave direction to
work with the community on the issues
and their concerns. So, I I'm not too
sure exactly where this is coming from.
Is there a possibility of following up?
Honorable mayor, members of the council,
absolutely. We'll get the contact
information from the clerk. Uh I'll
reach out personally to both gentlemen
that spoke tonight. Uh assistant city
manager Liz Morales has been involved
since day one and I've attended some of
those meetings that you're referring to.
So we'll just make sure that we uh we
follow up and uh
get get things back on track. Yeah, that
would be I would I really appreciate it
because I think that there's simple
answers especially to the affordability
question. Um
but yeah, if we can follow up and have
anka with housing community development
follow up with with these individuals
and see what their needs are. All
righty. Uh, Marianne Trombino.
Good evening, mayor and city council.
My name is Maryanne Trroino. Um, I am
here to once again discuss the Kingston
Kitchen SLCDS
slash
um, now Done uh, restaurant business.
Um, I live about
ft
north of the business that's in the
strip mall on Speedway. It's my uh their
address is 5305 East Speedway. Mine is
53113 North uh East Belleview. Um they
continue to run their restaurant
business on Fridays and Saturday nights
as a nightclub and the noise, the
thumping noise continues
uh into our neighborhood. And there's
other residents in our neighborhood that
also are affected by this. We visited
this when Steve Casachic was here and um
they came to an agreement that
uh the owner agreed that the closing
time would be 1000 p.m. on Monday and
and through Saturday, 8:00 p.m. on
Sunday. There will be no events in which
music is played with the exception of
karaoke on some occasional Friday and
Saturday evenings and on those days they
would remain uh closed at 1000 p.m. Uh
and there would be no um dancing or DJ
music and actually uh Mr. Rankin uh was
uh part of that uh agreement. Um, the
crown ju is under new mana or c uh kings
and kitchen is under new management now.
It's called the crown. It's it's still
owned by the same person. Um, they do
not have any business hours lo um posted
on their business nor on their website.
So it's so it's always who knows when
the music is going to be playing and
there is dancing there. So, I am asking
uh Ward Six and also the city council or
the people who deal with the liquor
license, there's they're up for a new
liquor license and I'm objecting to that
until something can be uh resolved.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Miss Jino. I'm going
to press that city manager uh have a
followup on this.
Thank you so much. Uh, Jessica Allen.
Good evening, mayor and council members.
My name is Jessica Allen and I'm here as
a concerned homeowner in the Sugar Hill
neighborhood. I live three blocks from
Star Village. My neighbors and I have
emailed the mayor's office regarding
ongoing issues with drugs and homeless
in the industrial area of Sugar Hill
neighborhood many times. I'm sure the
mayor's office is well aware of the
issues we have in this area. So my
question is, how are homeless women
going to be safe in a neighborhood that
is too dangerous to walk your dog around
the block? Your security isn't going to
follow the women and children through
the neighborhood as they commute. So,
who is going to be keeping these people
safe in the neighborhood? You're not
doing anything as far as the drugs and
the criminals in the area, but you're
adding 25 new people to an area that is
dangerous. And when I say dangerous, I
mean dangerous. I purchased my home over
a year ago in this area. And the reason
I purchased my home was the security
around it. I've got an autistic daughter
and I thought that was great just having
that security around my home. But when I
learned more about the neighborhood, I
learned that this neighborhood has a big
drug dealer, drug user, and criminal
problem. And a lot of it has to do with
the homeless in the area. There's no
women in our area that are vulnerable.
It's all men. And I can go out and take
pictures at any point in the day and
show you that with proof.
Um, I don't appreciate having to explain
drugs being done out in the open with no
consequences to my 12-year-old autistic
daughter because that's what we see
driving home. Why don't you care about
the safety of these women or even the
safety of the homeowners and the
business owners? Do you really think it
is humane putting people in tents and
keeping them outside when indoor
facilities offering safe sleeping
options are sitting at 50%.
So I ask, who do we hold responsible
when this doesn't work and when the
neighbors crime rate when the
neighborhood's crime rates become worse
than they already are? Who do we hold
responsible when the children at the bus
stop a block away from where you are
putting Star Village are harassed and
they are no longer able to get a safe
ride to get an education. You said,
Mayor Romero, that you were not doing
this to the community. You are doing
this with the community. But the
community had no part in this, nor was
the community even aware until this news
story came out.
That's not doing this with the
community. And I feel like you, Mayor
Romero, need to spend some time in our
neighborhood and see what we are
fighting against every day. I have
worked hard as a homeowner protecting my
home and the safety of my family,
fighting these homeless people. Lafrrena
put a place at the corner of our street
that was supposed to be managed with
security. This was almost 30 years ago
and the neighborhood had to sign off on
that. And let me tell you what's
happening there now. Nobody manages this
property at 113 Flores Street. That
doesn't happen. There is no manager on
site. There are drug dealers inside that
complace that I just personally got
evicted because I personally worked with
TPD to get that done and I contacted
Lafera myself. But there are still drug
users in that apartment complex that go
right around the corner behind that
complex right next to my home and the
home next to me and do their drugs all
night, all day. This is not a safe
neighborhood for this. And I ask you to
please reconsider your decision because
I think that if you're going to try to
help people, you should put them in an
area that's going to be safe for them,
not an area that's going to cause them
more harm.
Thank you for your time.
Uh thank you, Miss Allen. We will make
sure that we follow up and give you all
of the information that you need.
Thank you.
Okay. Uh Christine Flanigan,
Mayor Romero, and Council. Um my name is
Christine Flanigan. I'm a citizen of
Tucson. I'm also the president of the
Friends of Ironwood Forest, and I just
want to say thank you for considering
this resolution in support of Ironwood
Forest National Monument. Um, we are in
the 25th anniversary year and for 25
years, save for a couple of years back
in 2017, we were secure in the
boundaries of our monument. That may no
longer be the case. We are waiting to
see if there will be a proposal to uh
reduce the size of the monument in order
to permit further extraction
uh especially from I think it's going to
come from a copper mine that's near us.
I want to remind you that Ironwood
Forest National Monument is
in a a primitive area that is surrounded
by the growing cities of Casag,
Eloy, Morirana, and Tucson. It's a place
where people go for solitude. It's a
place where wildlife migrates through
from the many isolated mountain ranges
and it serves as a pressure valve
against the changes that are brought
with climate change and drought. So,
Ironwood Forest National Monument is an
important part of our heritage going
forward. It's an important piece of
public land for our local area. So, I
encourage you to vote in support of the
resolution. And I would remind you that
on June 7th, when we celebrated the
anniversary of Ironwood Forest, over a
hundred people drove 25 miles out into
the desert to hold up signs that said
public land is not for sale land. And we
strongly believe that in Tucson, in this
area, and I know you believe it, too.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Miss Blanka.
This is going to be our last speaker,
uh, David Gadleski.
Good evening, uh, mayor, members of the
council. My name is David Gleski. Uh, my
office is 2840 North Country Club. I'm
the president and CEO of the Southern
Arizona Homebuilders Association. I
guess that makes me a paid speaker. Um,
I want to uh thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you this
evening. Um, I'd actually like to talk
to about something that I don't think
has received the attention that it
really deserves. Arizona as well as the
other uh lower basin states are in the
midst of a very serious discussions to
protect our fair and what I think is our
legal share of Colorado River water. Uh,
if you want more information, I would
encourage you to check out AW ADWR
Director Tom Bousotsky's op-ed in the
Denver Post recently. Um, specifically,
I'd like to commend Mayor Romero uh for
joining other mayors across the state to
form the coalition for protecting
Arizona's lifeline. This is a
nonpartisan uh alliance advocating for
Arizona's allocation of the Colorado
River uh water and the CAP. Um, as the
mayor mentioned in her comments, this wa
Tucson relies on this water to support
our homes, our businesses, and our
environment. Uh, and so while Tucson has
done an exceptional job of creating a
culture of conservation and led many
innovative efforts to protect our water
resources while also facilitating
sustainable growth and setting the stage
for economic opportunity, we must do
more and continue to work at these high
levels to advocate for uh the CAP. Um,
and you know, personally, I I I I may
have been uh known from time to time to
being critical of certain water policies
or development related processes. Um,
but it's really your collective efforts
that in managing our water resources
that will allow us to thrive in a drier
uh future. And this is a success story
that I deserve uh that I think deserves
to be uh told. Um, I'd also be remiss if
I didn't say uh in my experience in in
serving with uh city manager Tomura and
a number of uh statewide um uh
committees and councils as well well as
other Tucson water staff. Uh your team
is is held in very very high regards
around the state for their technical
expertise and leadership. Um, and so I
stand ready uh to work with you as as
our our organization does to protect the
cap allocation and achieve a water
future where we can achieve our social,
environmental, and economic goals. Um,
and now I'd like to make a hard right
turn um and get in on the the Mike
Rankin day uh accolades. Um, I've known
Mike for over 15 years, always in a in a
professional capacity and held him in
very high regards. Um, but uh I got a an
opportunity to see kind of firsthand the
uh quality of a human being he is when I
bumped into him at the Festival of Books
a few years ago doing setup and in tear
down for uh his kids band. And so I'm
glad he's been able to turn his side
hustle into what I assume is a very
lucrative postretirement career. Thank
you.
We move on to item seven,
consent agenda items. Reports from the
city manager on the consent agenda are
received into and made part of the
record. Miss Clerk, you are requested to
read the consent agenda.
Item A is financial participation
agreement with a sonor and institute for
expansion of its living river Tucson
report. This item is being considered
separately at the request of council
member Cunningham. Item B is a financial
participation agreement with Tucson
Clean and Beautiful for management of
Tucson's Tucson Waters Green Storm Water
Infrastructure Mini Grants Program.
Items C through G are lease agreements
with T-Mobile West LLC, DBA, T-Mobile
for telecom telecommunication facilities
at Greasero Road and Speedway Boulevard,
LF0520,
RP Row.
One at 1255 South Beverly Avenue,
LF000050,
RP631.
The next one is at 4796 East Grant Road,
LF0426
RP Row.
The next one is 3544 East Broadway
Boulevard, LF000051,
RP Row. And the last uh mobile
communications is at 7167 East Escalante
Road, LF0489
RP. Item H is Tucson fiber to the
premises FTTP fiber license and
right-of-way use agreement. This item is
being considered separately at the
request of Councilwoman Lee. Item A is
the final plant for TD DIIB 04240034
Campbell Estates lots 1-8. Item J is a
final plat for TD DIIB1124
0091 the Palms lots one and two. Item K
is an IGA between the city of Tucson and
Arrow's Department of Transportation for
the Irvington Road traffic interchange
project. Item L is an agreement for tree
propagation and operation of the city of
Tucson's tree tree resource education
and ecology center. Item M is a
resolution declaring support for
Ironwood Forest National Monument and
opposing a reduction of its boundaries
for resource extraction. This item will
be considered at separately at the
request of Mayor Rometo. Item N is a
labor agreement with the American
Federation of State, County, and
Municipal Employees asks me local 905.
So an appropriate motion, mayor, would
be to approve items A through N with the
exception of items A, H, and M, which
will be considered separately.
So moved, your honor.
Second.
There's a motion and a second. Any
further discussion on the motion?
Hearing none, uh, we need to go to roll
call.
Mr. Cunningham.
I,
Mr. D.
Mrs. Lee.
Hi,
Mr. Pettz.
Miss Sulic.
I,
Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
Hi,
Mayor Romero.
I The items on the consent agenda are
approved by a vote of 70. We're
considering a fee separately. Yes. The
first item to be considered separately
is item A at the request of Council
Member Cunningham.
Yes, your honor. Um, I'm in support of
this. Obviously, the uh living river
study for the Santa Cruz River is very
important and I'm very much okay with
spending the money over 5 years to do
it. It's good use. But
we're missing an opportunity here in
Tucson. We have some other watersheds.
Uh Auakalente Wash, Pantana Wash, also
known as the Sienna Creek, the Tanky
Creek, and the Rito River. Those are all
possible opportunities to also have a
living river study done. Now, I don't
know if we I don't want to do that now,
but I want to put that in staff's ear
that we've got to think about these
living rivers in other areas of town,
just not the Santa Cruz. I think that's
an opportunity for us and as water
becomes more and more precious. We've
tal we talked about storm water today.
We talked about the uh lake me levels
today. I think that has to be on our
radar. So with that I move the item
second.
There's a motion and a second. Any
further discussion on this
hearing? None. We need roll call.
Mr. Cunningham.
Hi.
Mr. D.
I.
Mr. Perez.
Hi.
Miss Sulik.
Mrs. Lee.
I.
Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
Hi.
Mayor Romero.
I. The items on the consent agenda are
approved by a vote of 70. The next item
to be considered separately is item H at
the request of Councilwoman Lee.
Thank you, Mayor. Thank you for giving
us a chance to talk about this item. Uh,
as the vice mayor said earlier in this
meeting, we have to celebrate our our
wins when we can get them. And I think
this is a significant program that we're
moving forward tonight. So, I wanted to
take a moment and talk about this. Uh,
as far as um my time on the council back
in 2021, I remember something called
Project Coconut because, you know, we
have to have a fun name for everything.
uh it was a fiber provider, not dietary
fiber but fiber optic internet provider
um slight distinction there who was
knocking on Tucson's door and wanted to
enter the market and um bring fiber
connectivity to the city and it at the
time we didn't really have a mechanism
up until tonight to uh allow fiber
providers to come in. Everything was
contingent on cable um like Cox and
Comcast to bring uh more fiber online.
So our team has been busy at work trying
to figure out how we can uh introduce
more internet service providers into the
market which will therefore drive down
costs for all of us which I am
personally excited about because we pay
a lot for internet. I live in a corner
of the city where we only have one or
two options and they are very expensive.
So I am very eager for this to come
online. Um, so you know, by having fiber
optic cable uh accessible across the
city, we can do a lot of really great
things in in terms of smart city
technology, intelligent traffic
management, uh, gunshot detection, smoke
detection, environmental monitoring, and
all kinds of things that this
infrastructure enables. Um, it also is
putting a dig once approach in place. I
know once we get our roads done and then
we see them getting cut, you know what
I'm talking about. They're digging up
the roads and it's maddening. And so
there's going to be a lot of alignment
in that. And I actually want to give uh
Sam, I see you're here. I want to give
you a moment to speak about it because I
was just going to acknowledge your team
Sam at DTM and how much work you all
have been doing in uh parallel with it.
And Sam, if you want to talk about this
at all in your own words and give any
shout outs, please do so.
Thank you so much, Councilwoman Lee,
Madame Mayor, members of the council.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to
talk about this. You're right. And I
actually, Jen and I were just kind of
chatting because I worked on Project
Coconut when I was in the city manager's
office. And um this is an exciting
moment for the city of Tucson uh to be
able to provide an opportunity to have
fiber communications across the city. It
does provide amazing opportunities not
only for our community to have access to
fast and affordable internet, but for
all the other reasons that you talked
about. Um, I I'll take the balance of my
time at the microphone to acknowledge my
colleagues who worked on this, including
our deputy director, Jen Tuther, who is
sitting with me in the audience. She has
spent a tremendous amount of time
working on this, also from her time in
the manager's office, as well as the
department of transportation and
mobility. Um, director Mozarella with it
has been a wonderful partner uh seeing
his vision through with this. He has a
great team supporting him such as Jason.
And uh we also have a wonderful partner
and our our contractor who's helping us
get this program up and running. So
we're very excited and eager to have
this uh template approved tonight
because the next steps as we open it up
to the public, allow those fiber
companies to apply, begin negotiations,
and then we'll bring those individual
agreements back to mayor and council for
approval. Thank you very much.
So super exciting. Thank you for all of
your work. And with that, mayor, I would
like to move the item forward.
Second.
There's a motion and a second. Any
further discussion?
Thank you Sam and Jen so much for your
work and also uh director Maserella for
for his work on this everyone. It's
taken some time and um appreciate
appreciate the work. Thank you. Um roll
call.
Mrs. Lee.
Hi.
Mr. D.
Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
Hi.
Mulik.
Mr. Perez.
Hi.
Mr. Cunningham. Mayor Romero.
I the item on the consent agenda is
approved by a vote of 70.
The next item is item M. At your
request, Mayor.
Yes. I wanted to uh consider this item
separately.
uh to officially share our support for
the opposition of reducing the
boundaries of the Ironwood Forest
National Monument particularly
for uh the reason of resource
extraction. Um colleagues before uh us
we have today a resolution. It's a
statement of the values of the city of
Tucson um and of my colleagues and I on
the council and our community. We're
being asked to call on Arizona's
congressional delegation to retain the
full designation and protections of the
Ironwood Forest National Monument, one
of southern Arizona's most iconic
landscapes. The Trump administration has
tried before to shrink and privatize
national monuments across our country
specifically for resource extraction. We
cannot let the iron forest be next.
The Ironwood Forest National Monument is
quintessential sonoran desert, a
biodiverse treasure just uh a short
drive from Tucson. It spans 190,000
acres, seven mountain ranges and
multiple wildlife corridors. It's a
natural wild state that supports not
only our ecology but our identity as a
desert city. The Civel Mountains hold
the highest known desert density of
ironwood trees in the Sonoran Desert.
These trees can live for up to 800 years
and give shelter to Sagawados and
countless other species.
Ragettop Mountain alone is home to 674
species, including 64 mammals, 54 bird
species, and is just an oasis. The
ironwood um um forest also protects the
last viable herd of big horn sheep
indigenous to the Tucson basin. It is
sacred ground. Uh thousands of year of
of years of human history are reflected
in archaeological sites, petroglyphs and
cultural places that are sacred to the
Tono Otam and Pasuayaki people. To
shrink this protection would dishonor
that heritage. It protect uh if
protections are rolled back, mining
companies could gain access at the
expense of everyone else. Roads,
artificial lights, and noise would scar
the land, sever wildlife corridors, and
destroy the very experience that makes
the monument valuable. This isn't
speculation. We've seen it happen
elsewhere when federal protections are
rolled back, extractions win, and people
lose.
This resolution affirms Tucson's voice
in protecting lands that are essential
to our environment, our culture, and our
economy. It demonstrates to Congress
that local governments are paying
attention and that we expect full
protection of the Ironwood um forest
national monument and that our city
stands united in defending public lands.
Passing this resolution puts us on
record as leaders, not bystanders, in
the fight to protect our desert
heritage. I would ask uh to move um this
resolution, please.
So moved.
Second.
There's a motion and a second. Council
member D.
Thank you. Words can barely express how
much I endorse this proposal. But first,
I have to bring back the prop.
This is an ironwood tree.
Just so we know
a small part of what we're protecting
there. My history with this goes back. I
was very early on involved with the
Coalition for Snor Desert Protection. In
my photograph album, I have a picture of
myself and Arizona's Bruce Babbot, who
was Secretary of the Interior at the
time when this was designated by um
President Clinton. I've been at events
out there where um um the former
representative Ral Ghova spoke where he
was vice chairman at the time but now
chairman Verlin Jose spoke on how much
the monument meant to him. I've been out
there with um Felipe Molina who's an
elder with the Yaki tribe to see some of
the sites that are important to him.
It's an amazing place. It should always
be an amazing place not just for us but
for our children and our children's
children. And that's why I was so happy
to make this motion. Thank you, mayor.
Any others?
All righty. Let's go to roll call.
Mr. D.
I.
Mr. Cunningham.
Sorry.
Hi,
Mr. Perez.
Mulik.
Hi,
Mrs. Lee.
Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
Hi,
Mayor Romero.
I The item on the consent agenda is
approved by a vote of 70. Thank you so
much for bringing it to us. Thank you.
Item eight,
reszoning ordinance adoption C9-21-14,
the place at Mason Ranch, phase 2,
Danker Road, SR to R3.
City managers communication number 274
dated September 9th is received into
made part of the record. This is a
request for an ordinance to reszone
approximately 3.6 6 acres from SR to R3
zoning. The reszoning site is located at
north of Tank Verde Road and west of
Bear Canyon Road. The preliminary
development plan proposes 56 new
apartment units in two-story buildings
as phase two of the place at Mason
Ranch, a multifamily apartment
community. The total project site area
including both faces has a total of 312
apartment units proposed. The city
manager and zoning examiner recommend
approval of the reszoning request. Is
the applicant or representative of the
applicant present?
I don't see them. All righty. Um, we
don't have uh the um the applicant or
representative to agree to the proposed
requirements. I think that uh Council
Member Cunningham, you have had some
communication with
So, yeah, there's a couple things going
on here. This is actually not a re
reasoning per se. We actually already
passed this in 2022, but they had to
meet a bunch of We gave them a number of
conditions to meet. So now they're back
before us to and we've affirmed that
they've met those conditions. The main
part of this resoning uh happened, but
just so everybody understands, there's a
donut hole in the there's a donut of SR1
space that's zoned SR1 and the rest of
it is already zoned C3 surrounding.
Also, all three adjacent properties are
R3. So this is filling that and
finishing out this project. I think
that's how I understand it. I didn't
even I think this is more of a
formality. So, I'm going to move the
item.
Okay. So, Miss Click, you are requested
to read ordinance 12189 by number and
title only.
Ordinance number 12189 relating to
zoning amending zoning district
boundaries in the area located
approximately 500 ft north of Tanker the
road and 700 ft west of Bear Canyon Road
in KC921-14.
the place at Mason Ranch phase two
dunker the road SR to R3 and setting an
effective date.
Council member Cunningham, did I hear
you that you move to approve?
Yeah, I I move the item and I want to
make sure that we have on the record
that well no I actually I have a
question. So I'll move the item and when
we second I'll I'll ask the question
discussion.
Second.
So there's a motion and a second. Any
discussion? Council member Cuttingham. I
think part of this was part of a
pre-annexate. Was this part of a
pre-annexation agreement?
Uh, council member Cunningham, uh,
honorable mayor, members of council,
this, uh, as council member Cunningham
referenced earlier, the mayor and
council did act on this in 2022.
They went through the authorization
process for the resoning. And so, the
conditions were established at that
time, and the applicant did agree to the
conditions. Now they're back for the
ordinance adoption having shown
compliance with the conditions. So I
don't know that there was an annexation
in connection with it. I don't think so.
Um there wouldn't have been because it
was an authorization. So but you are
correct that the conditions already have
been agreed upon and satisfied.
Okay.
All righty. I have no other discussion.
Roll call.
Mr. Cunningham.
I.
Mr. D.
Mrs. Lee.
Hi.
Mr. Pettis.
Hi. Mulik.
Hi,
Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
I,
Mayor Romero,
I. Ordinance 12189 passes by a vote of
70. Item nine,
reszoning ordinance adoption C9-9-10,
Corbett, 29th Street, R1 to R2.
City manager communication number 282
dated September 9th is received into and
made part of the record. This is a
request for an ordinance to reszone
approximately 6.88 acres from R1 to R2
zoning. The reszoning site is located on
the northeast corner of 29th Street and
Sawara Avenue. The applicant is
developing a single family residential
subdivision of 71 lots with 12 guest
parking spaces at a density of 10.34
RAC. The resoning was authorized by
mayor and council on November 6, 2019.
The city manager and zoning examiner
recommend approval of the resoning
request. I don't know if the applicant
or representative of the applicant if
they are present.
I don't see them here.
Um,
all righty. Miss clerk, you are
requested to read ordinance 12190 by
number and title only.
Ordinance number 12190 relating to
zoning amending zoning district
boundaries in the area located at the
northeast corner of 29th Street and
Sahada Avenue in case C919-10
Corbett 29th Street R1 to R2 and setting
an effective date.
Council member Ulik.
Thank you, Mayor. I move that we approve
the request and the ordinance adoption
for R2 zoning subject to the conditions
as reflected in the ordinance.
Second.
There is a motion and a second. Any
further discussion hearing? None. Let's
go to roll call.
Mulik.
I.
Vice Mayor Santa Cruz.
Mrs. Lee.
Hi.
Mr. D.
Mr. Cunningham.
Hi.
Mr. Perez.
Mayor Romero. I ordinance 12190 passes
by a vote of 70. Item 10, adjournment.
Council will stand adjourned. The next
regularly scheduled meeting will be on
Tuesday, September 23rd, 2025 at or
after 5:30 p.m. Thank you so much
everyone. Have a wonderful rest of your
week.